
--- PAGE 602 ---
513CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
program and should be done as a part of the physiatrist’s initial 
history and physical examination.
A few key cardiopulmonary examination findings are highlighted 
here.
Cardiac auscultation can indicate an atrial septal defect, 
a midsystolic click may indicate mitral valve prolapse, and a 
murmur may indicate valvular heart disease. Pulmonary hyper -
tension typically produces a heightened second heart sound, 
a noncompliant ventricle can be detected via an atrial gallop 
at the cardiac apex, and a left ventricular gallop may reveal 
heart failure. The pulse contour, split heart sounds, and the 
quality of the murmur can help to differentiate aortic sclero -
sis from aortic stenosis. In younger patients, pulmonary ste -
nosis or valvular heart disease needs to be differentiated from 
idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. Diastolic murmurs 
may be mitral stenosis or pulmonary hypertension with pul -
monary valve regurgitation, and continuous murmurs may be 
from ventricular septal or atrial septal defects. New findings 
or changes in findings are important as they may indicate the 
need for further evaluation or alterations in the program of 
cardiopulmonary rehabilitation.
Lung physical examination may have decreased breath sounds 
and/or barrel chest in obstructive disease, whereas interstitial lung 
disease may have diffuse or basilar crackles. Inspiratory stridor 
may indicate upper airway obstruction, whereas expiratory wheez-
ing and rhonchi can be seen with obstruction or secretions. It is 
also important to assess symmetry of breathing, accessory muscle 
use, and possible compromise to diaphragmatic function. 
Cardiac Anatomy and Physiology
Cardiac Anatomy
T o supervise cardiac rehabilitation, it is essential to be familiar 
with the normal distribution of the major arteries of the heart, the 
anatomy of the heart valves, and the distribution of ischemia or 
infarction from the coronary arteries.
The heart has paired atria and ventricles, with deoxygenated 
venous blood entering the right atrium, traversing the right ventri-
cle through the tricuspid valve, and entering the pulmonary artery 
through the pulmonic valve. Oxygenated blood enters the left 
atrium, goes to the left ventricle through the mitral valve, and is 
ejected into the aorta through the aortic valve. The cardiac valves 
ensure unidirectional unobstructed flow of blood, with atrial con-
traction adding up to 15% to 20% to the total cardiac output 
(CO). Atrial contribution to blood flow is greater with increased 
heart rate and in conditions with decreased ventricular compli -
ance.131 Atrial fibrillation can cause a loss of this atrial “kick” and 
may contribute to cardiac dysfunction.
The cardiac conduction system allows coordinated contraction 
of the atria and ventricles at a controlled rate. The normal heart -
beat is initiated at the sinoatrial node and then travels through 
three atrial internodal pathways to the atrioventricular node, 
where conduction is delayed to cause sequential atrial and ventric-
ular contraction. Below the atrioventricular node, the signal passes 
into the bundle of His and divides into left and right bundles. 
All cardiac fibers then end in terminal branches, which excite the 
myocytes and cause contraction. The conduction system can be 
injured by myocardial infarction (MI), aging, and other condi -
tions and can cause heart block or sick sinus syndrome. Acces -
sory pathways that bypass the atrioventricular node can be seen in 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.
Variation of Arteries
There are three main distributions of coronary circulation. Nor -
mally the left main coronary artery divides into the left anterior 
descending and the circumflex arteries, whereas the right coronary 
artery continues on as a single vessel. Right dominant circulation 
is seen in 60% of individuals, whereas left dominant circulation 
with the posterior descending artery arising from the left circum -
flex is seen in 10% to 15% of individuals. The remaining 30% of 
individuals have balanced circulation with the posterior descend -
ing artery coming from the left circumflex and right coronary 
arteries.4 
Cardiac Physiology
Cardiac myocytes extract nearly 65% of oxygen from the blood 
at all levels of activity (compared with 36% for brain and 26% 
for the rest of the body). Cardiac myocytes prefer carbohydrates 
as an energy source (40%), with fatty acids making up most of 
the remaining 60%. With high oxygen extraction and coronary 
blood flow only during diastole, the heart is at high risk of isch -
emic injury, especially in the endocardium. Coronary vasodilation 
with exercise is normally done via nitric oxide–mediated pathways 
and increases blood flow with exertion. The goal of most medical 
and surgical therapies for ischemia is to restore or preserve myo -
cardial perfusion through vasodilation, bypass, or endovascular 
procedures. Exercise can increase cardiac collateral circulation and 
improve arteriolar vasodilation and has long been known to be a 
primary therapy for cardiac ischemia.86,112,114,148
Another important issue to manage with patients with cardiac 
disease is fluid volume. Appropriate venous return can maintain 
appropriate cardiac “preload,” whereas fluid overload can lead to too 
much venous return and exacerbate heart failure. In cases of mechan-
ical cardiac constriction, surgery can restore CO, and in dilated heart 
failure, medical treatment aims to decrease the size of the ventricles 
to increase CO. In refractory or end-stage disease, left ventricular 
assist devices (LVADs) and cardiac transplantation are options. 
Pulmonary Anatomy and Physiology
Pulmonary Anatomy
Important pulmonary anatomy includes the upper and lower airways 
(the oropharynx, larynx, trachea, main stem bronchi, and smaller 
bronchi), the lung parenchyma, the chest wall, and musculature 
(diaphragm, accessory muscles of breathing, rib cage, and pleura). 
Pulmonary limitations can come from abnormalities in any of these 
structures. The lungs also have a dual circulation with pulmonary 
arteries and veins, which deliver deoxygenated blood to the lungs and 
deliver oxygenated blood to the left atrium and intrinsic pulmonary 
artery circulation delivering oxygenated blood to the respiratory tree.
Stridor can result from upper airway obstruction from vocal cord 
paralysis or tumor, whereas asthma, bronchitis, or reactive airway dis-
ease may cause dyspnea from lower airway obstruction. Emphysema 
is a result of parenchymal lung disease with a loss of alveoli leading to 
decreased intrinsic recoil of the lung and subsequent hyperinflation 
and dyspnea. In interstitial lung disease and pulmonary fibrosis, there is 
interstitial scarring with increased recoil and decreased ability to diffuse 
oxygen through the lung tissues. In some patients, both restrictive and 
obstructive diseases can be present with one predominant over another 
(cystic fibrosis and sarcoidosis). In these cases, it is important to evalu-
ate the lung parenchyma with imaging or physiologic testing (pulmo-
nary function tests) to assess which condition may predominate.13 

--- PAGE 603 ---
514
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
Pulmonary Physiology
Normal breathing is regulated in the medulla oblongata by the 
respiratory center. Respiratory signals are carried by the phrenic 
and other somatic nerves to the diaphragm and secondary inspi -
ratory muscles (intercostals, sternocleidomastoids, and pectorals) 
and cause rhythmic breathing by generating negative pressure in 
the chest wall. Normal exhalation is passive, resulting from the 
elastic recoil of the chest wall and the lung parenchyma. COPD 
and emphysema can create the need for active exhalation, mark -
edly increasing the work of breathing. Interstitial lung disease 
with scarring decreases compliance of lung tissue so severely that 
lung volumes decrease and hypoventilation can result. Any disease 
affecting the brain, spine, phrenic nerves, respiratory muscles, or 
changing the mechanical properties of the chest wall or diaphragm 
can affect normal respiration.99,100
Pulmonary vascular disease can result in either primary or 
secondary pulmonary hypertension. Primary pulmonary hyper -
tension can be idiopathic or can result from vasculitis, throm -
boembolic disease, or intrinsic parenchymal disease. Secondary 
pulmonary hypertension is from vascular congestion, often a result 
of left heart failure. Secondary pulmonary hypertension can lead to 
intrinsic vascular compromise if the condition is chronic. Chronic 
hypoxemia may also create pulmonary hypertension in individu -
als with obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, or high-altitude exposure 
through a mechanism of pulmonary vascular constriction. Chronic 
hypoxemia can lead to vascular intimal hypertrophy with resultant 
fixed pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary hypertension. 
Basic Terminology for Exercise
Aerobic Capacity
Aerobic capacity (Vo2max) is the measure of the work capacity of 
an individual and is expressed as the oxygen consumed by the 
individual (liters of oxygen per minute or milliliters of oxygen per 
kilogram per minute). Oxygen consumption (V o2) increases lin -
early with workload, up to the Vo2max, where it reaches a plateau. 
Maximal exercise capacity assessment can assist in rating disability 
and planning exercise and recovery programs.13 
Heart Rate
Heart rate is a useful guide for exercise as a result of having a linear 
relationship to Vo2. Maximum heart rate is best determined by 
testing and decreases with age. It can be estimated either by the 
Karvonen equation or by the equation heart rate = 220 − age. 70 
Physical conditioning can alter the slope of the relationship of 
heart rate and Vo2 with improved conditioning lowering the slope 
(less heart rate increase for a given V o2). A limitation to using 
heart rate can be the alteration of heart rate response in the setting 
of medications that alter vagal and sympathetic tone.13 
Stroke Volume
Stroke volume (SV) is the volume of blood ejected with a left ven-
tricular contraction. Maximal SV can be increased with exercise 
and is sensitive to postural changes (least increases in supine), with 
the greatest increase during early exercise. Normally SV increases 
in a curvilinear manner, achieving maximum at approximately 
40% of Vo2max. SV declines with advancing age, with decreased 
cardiac compliance, after MI, and in heart failure.40 
Cardiac Output
CO is the product of the heart rate and SV . It has a linear rela -
tionship with work and is the primary determinant of Vo2max. At 
maximum exercise, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), and 
thus CO, is greater in the upright position compared with the 
supine position.13,121 
Myocardial Oxygen Consumption
Myocardial oxygen consumption (M vo2) is the Vo2 of the heart 
muscle increasing in proportion to workload. When the M vo2 
exceeds the maximum coronary artery oxygen delivery, an indi -
vidual will have myocardial ischemia and angina. The rate pressure 
product (RPP) = [heart rate × systolic blood pressure (SBP)]/100 
and has a direct relationship to the M vo2. Another consideration 
is that arm exercise, isometric exercise, and exertion in the cold, 
extreme heat, after eating, and after smoking all have a higher 
Mvo2 for a given M vo2. Supine exercises have a higher M vo2 at 
low intensity and a lower M vo2 at high intensity compared with 
erect exercises.13
Basic static lung volumes and dynamic responses to exercise 
are helpful in the assessment of exercise capacity in individuals 
with lung disease. Although complete pulmonary function evalu-
ation is beyond the scope of this chapter, some important values 
include:  
T otal lung capacity (TLC): Volume of air in the lungs at full in -
spiration
Vital capacity (VC): Volume of air between full inspiration and 
full expiration
Forced expired vital capacity (FVC): Maximum volume expired 
after a maximal forced expiration
Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1): Maximum volume 
exhaled in 1 second
Maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV): Measurement of the max-
imal ventilation over 15 seconds
Residual volume (RV): Volume of the chest wall after a full expira-
tion
Tidal volume (TV): Volume of regular resting breath
Diffusion of the lung for carbon monoxide (D lco ): Diffusion of 
carbon monoxide (oxygen analog) across the alveolar mem -
brane  
The best evaluation of the capacity to exercise in cardiac and 
pulmonary conditions is with a cardiopulmonary exercise test 
(CPET). The CPET yields diagnostic, prognostic, and exercise 
prescription guidance in patients with cardiopulmonary disease. 
The interpretation of pulmonary exercise testing in a number of 
conditions is shown in Table 27.2. 
Interventions for Cardiopulmonary Disease
Aerobic Training
Physical exercise that increases the cardiopulmonary capacity 
(Vo2max) allows for aerobic training. All aerobic training prescrip-
tions must include four components: intensity, duration, fre -
quency, and specificity.
Intensity. How hard an exercise is. It can be prescribed by a 
target heart rate, metabolic (MET) level, or intensity (wattage). 
Usual intensity target for cardiac primary prevention is a heart rate 
of 80% to 85% of the predicted maximum heart rate/peak heart 
rate from the exercise tolerance test (ETT). For secondary pre -
vention in patients with known cardiopulmonary disease, exercise 
should be at a safe level at 60% or more of the maximum heart 
rate to achieve a training effect. 
Duration. How long a given bout of exercise is. Usual cardio -
pulmonary conditioning requires 20- to 30-minute sessions and 

--- PAGE 604 ---
515CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
  Effects of Physiologic Conditions on Cardiopulmonary Exercise Capacity
Abnormality Physiologic Abnormality Gas Exchange
Obesity 	 •	 	Increased	work	with	activity
	 •	 	Inefficient	exercise
	 •	 	Rapid	alveolar-arterial	p(a-a)o2 fall with exercise
	 •	 	Low	aerobic	capacity	(Vo2max)
	 •	 	Rapid	fatigue
Peripheral vascular disease 	 •	 	Claudication	can	limit	exercise 	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Increased	lactic	acidosis
	 •	 	Associated	deconditioning	often	present
	 •	 	Low	anaerobic	threshold
Pulmonary vascular disease 	 •	 	Impaired	pulmonary	blood	flow
	 •	 	Right	ventricular	failure	or	overload
	 •	 	Possible	right	to	left	shunt
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Low	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Rapid	pulse	at	low	exercise
	 •	 	Hypoxemia
	 •	 	Excessive	dyspnea
Anemia 	 •	 	Low	oxygen-carrying	capacity 	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Early	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Rapid	pulse	at	low	exercise
	 •	 	Fatigue	and	dyspnea
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease
	 •	 	Impairment	to	expiratory	phase	of	breathing
	 •	 	Decreased	alveolar	ventilation
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Low	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Rapid	pulse	at	low	exercise
	 •	 	Submaximum	heart	rate	achieved
	 •	 	Retention	of	CO2 that increases with exercise
Restrictive lung disease 
(intrinsic)
	 •	 	Poor	diffusion	capacity
	 •	 	Poor	pulmonary	compliance
	 •	 	Pulmonary	hypertension	in	later	disease
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Early	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Tachypnea	at	all	levels	of	exertion
	 •	 	Low	pulmonary	reserve
	 •	 	High	alveolar-arterial	p(a-a)o2 difference yielding marked hypoxemia
	 •	 	Marked	dyspnea
	 •	 	Presence	of	pulmonary	hypertension	can	cause	severe	hypoxemia	
and loss of hemodynamic response to exercise
	 •	 	Can	trigger	cough	with	exercise
Restrictive lung disease 
(extrinsic)
	 •	 	Poor	chest	wall	compliance
	 •	 	Chest	wall	muscle	weakness
	 •	 	Loss	of	neural	control	of	breathing	 
musculature
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Early	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Tachypnea	with	low	tidal	volumes
	 •	 	Low	pulmonary	reserve
	 •	 	Submaximum	heart	rate	achieved
	 •	 	Oxygenation	and	CO2 usually preserved until severe end-stage 
disease
Asthma 	 •	 	Restricted	expiratory	phase	of	breathing	
from airway obstruction
	 •	 	Decreased	alveolar	ventilation
	 •	 	In	exercise-induced	asthma,	peak	flows	
drop 5–10 minutes into exercise
	 •	 	Most	findings	are	normal	when	not	symptomatic	and	resemble	
obstructive disease with acute attack
Ventricular failure 	 •	 	Compromised	pulmonary	blood	flow
	 •	 	In	left	ventricular	failure,	can	have	 
pulmonary vascular congestion
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
	 •	 	Early	anaerobic	threshold
	 •	 	Tachypnea,	dyspnea
	 •	 	Exaggerated	heart	rate	response	to	exercise
	 •	 	May	have	hypoxemia	with	pulmonary	congestion	and	loss	of	normal	
hemodynamic response to exercise
Ischemic heart disease 	 •	 	Chest	pain/cardiac	ischemia
	 •	 	Can	precipitate	ventricular	failure
	 •	 	Often	normal	at	rest	or	until	ischemia
	 •	 	With	onset	of	ischemia	and	ventricular	stiffening/systolic	 
dysfunction, can appear like mild ventricular failure
	 •	 	Can	have	loss	of	normal	hemodynamic	response	to	exercise	with	
onset of ischemia
Metabolic acidosis 	 •	 	Metabolic	acidosis,	low	HCO3− 	 •	 	Normal	diffusion
	 •	 	Exaggerated	response	of	ventilation	to	exercise
	 •	 	Low	Vo2max
  
TABLE 
27.2

--- PAGE 605 ---
516
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
should have a 5- to 10-minute warm-up and cool-down period. 
The lower the intensity of an exercise, the longer the duration will 
need to be to achieve a similar training effect. 
Frequency. How often exercise is performed over a fixed time 
period (usually a week). Moderate-intensity training programs 
should be done at least three times per week, and low-intensity 
programs should be done five times per week. 
Specificity . The activity to be done in exercise. T raining 
benefits are specifically related to the activities performed. Thus 
elliptical exercise is not as beneficial for walking as treadmill 
training. Specificity in prescription should be altered to adapt 
to the needs of each patient. For a patient with spinal cord 
injury, upper arm ergometry would be more functional, and 
for a patient with severe leg arthritis, cycle ergometry would 
be better than a treadmill. The law of specificity of condition -
ing should be remembered when designing a cardiopulmonary 
conditioning program. 2
The benefits of aerobic training include the following:  
Aerobic capacity: Maximum capacity increases with training. 
Resting Vo2 is stable as is the V o2 at a given workload. The 
changes are specific to the trained muscles.
Cardiac output: Maximum CO increases, whereas resting CO is 
stable. Resting SV increases with a corresponding decrease in 
resting heart rate.
Heart rate: Heart rate is lower at rest and at any given workload, 
whereas maximum heart rate is unchanged. The lower heart 
rate at rest and submaximal exercise causes a lower Mvo2 with 
normal activity.
Stroke volume: SV increases at rest and at all levels of exercise. CO 
is thus maintained at a lower heart rate and causes a lower RPP 
for a given level of exertion.
Myocardial oxygen capacity: After training, maximum Mvo2 does 
not usually change but is less at a given workload. This reduces 
episodes of angina and increases safety for moderate activity. 
Mvo2 can also increase after pharmacologic treatments or re -
vascularization procedures.
Peripheral resistance: Exercise training decreases peripheral vascu-
lar resistance (PVR) by reducing “afterload” through lowering 
arterial and arteriolar tone. The reduction in PVR results in a 
lower RPP and a lower Mvo2 at a given workload and at rest.
Minute ventilation: With improved conditioning, individuals will 
require a lower Vo2 and thus a lower minute ventilation for a 
given activity. For patients with pulmonary and cardiac disease, 
this can lead to a large reduction in dyspnea.
Tidal volume: Exercise can lead to a higher TV on exertion, with a 
subsequent decrease in respiratory rate and decreased dyspnea.
Respiratory rate: As TV is improved, respiratory rate will be lower 
for a given minute ventilation, decreasing dyspnea.  
The application of basic physiologic principles to the design 
of cardiopulmonary rehabilitation programs can improve func -
tion, decrease symptoms, and improve outcomes for patients 
with cardiopulmonary disease. The prime effect of cardiac con -
ditioning is in reduction of cardiac risk and improved cardiac 
conditioning. Reduction of cardiac risk has been well established 
since 1989, when pooled data from 22 randomized studies of 
exercise in 4554 patients following acute MI demonstrated a 
20% to 25% reduction in all-cause mortality, fatal MI, and car -
diac mortality in a 3-year follow-up study. 7 These benefits of 
cardiac rehabilitation apply across populations, including older 
adults, women, and patients after bypass. 7 Similar benefits have 
also been shown for pulmonary rehabilitation in COPD with 
decreased hospitalizations, improved function, and improved 
quality of life, 75,109,110,123 and new studies are showing that 
interstitial disease and pulmonary vascular disease can also ben -
efit from exercise. 33,43,59,63,132 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Abnormal Physiology: Lung
Patients with pulmonary disease demonstrate three main impair -
ments: (1) obstructive lung disease, (2) restrictive lung disease, 
and (3) pulmonary vascular disease. Often more than one type 
of limitation may be present in a given patient and will increase 
the complexity of their condition. Understanding the underlying 
physiology can assist in the design of a specific exercise program 
for an individual patient.
For primary pulmonary disease, it is essential to know if 
the patient has primarily an obstructive or restrictive condi -
tion. Obstructive lung disease is marked by an inability to 
exhale resulting from either upper airway or large airway dis -
ease (sleep apnea, tracheomalacia, vocal cord disease, asthma, 
and bronchitis) or as a result of lower airway disease from either 
secretions or lung parenchymal disease (emphysema and bron -
chiectasis). Obstruction can also be exacerbated by a compo -
nent of acute obstruction (asthma) combined with a chronic 
condition (COPD). The hallmark of severe COPD is carbon 
dioxide retention and active exhalation. Medical treatments are 
limited for COPD, with steroids and bronchodilators offering 
incomplete relief. Lung reduction surgery is appropriate only in 
selected individuals, and transplant is only for end-stage disease. 
For all levels of obstructive disease, pulmonary rehabilitation is 
appropriate, and in the “GOLD” recommendations for treat -
ment of COPD, pulmonary rehabilitation is recommended for 
all patients with moderate to severe disease. 47,48
In restrictive lung disease, the primary limitations are low 
TVs from an inability to expand the chest wall (extrinsic restric -
tion) or from very noncompliant lung tissue (intrinsic restric -
tion). In extrinsic restrictive disease (neuromuscular disease, 
paralysis, and kyphoscoliosis), the parenchyma of the lung is 
normal and gas exchange is preserved, meaning that treatment 
is usually respiratory muscle training and mechanical ventila -
tory support as needed. With intrinsic restrictive lung diseases 
(pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, etc.), there may be a profound 
associated hypoxemia from severely decreased diffusion capac -
ity of scarred lung tissue. Patients with parenchymal restrictive 
disease classically have severe hypoxemia and may need high-
flow supplemental oxygen. Patients with end-stage intrinsic 
restrictive disease can have ventilatory failure with hypercarbia 
and hypoxemia and may be refractory to ventilatory support, 
and lung transplantation is then often the only remaining treat -
ment option. Table 27.3 shows some of the lung pathologies and 
effects on inspiratory reserve and RV (obstructive diseases) and 
the effects of various conditions on lung compliance (restrictive 
diseases).15
Finally, patients with pulmonary vascular disease have a similar 
presentation in many ways to patients with heart failure, and in 
the end stages of the disease, right ventricular heart failure is a 
major part of the condition and leads to excess mortality and mor-
bidity.82 Rehabilitation is focused on a program that resembles 
exercise for patients with heart failure, with the addition of close 
monitoring of oxygen saturation and the use of appropriate levels 
of supplemental oxygen to prevent hypoxemia.

--- PAGE 606 ---
517CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
For patients with either intrinsic restrictive or obstructive dis -
ease, pulmonary rehabilitation is an important treatment to con -
sider and should be offered for patients whether or not they have 
their pulmonary condition as a primary or a secondary disability. 
A brief overview of pulmonary rehabilitation programs for pri -
mary pulmonary disease is shown in Table 27.4. 
Cardiac Rehabilitation
Abnormal Physiology: Heart
An understanding of abnormal cardiac physiology in disease is 
necessary for appropriate cardiac rehabilitation. In general, cardiac 
limitation is caused by either decreased CO, or ischemic disease, or 
a combination of these. Ischemia causes the myocardium to have 
lower contractility and lower compliance reducing SV . Valvular heart 
disease lowers maximum CO through stenotic valves (e.g., aortic or 
mitral stenosis) or valvular regurgitation (e.g., aortic or mitral insuf-
ficiency). Finally, heart failure is a state of low CO, often as a result 
of low SV , and is associated with a reduction of Vo2max, increased 
resting heart rate, and often a greater Mvo2 for a given Vo2.
Arrhythmias decrease CO by lowering SV and increasing heart 
rates. For atrial arrhythmias, the mechanism can be by a loss of atrial 
ventricular filling (atrial “kick”) during atrial fibrillation or supra-
ventricular tachycardias, or from high heart rates without atrial 
coordination as in ventricular tachycardias and ventricular bigeminy.
Surgical treatments for heart disease either restore coronary 
circulation (e.g., bypass and intravascular procedures) or restore 
normal anatomy (e.g., valve replacement). Surgical treatment for 
heart failure can include LVADs or transplantation.130,151 Medical 
treatment for heart disease either aims to improve coronary circu-
lation for ischemia or works to improve blood flow and restore CO 
for heart failure by lowering afterload, reducing fluid overload, and 
increasing inotropy. Although medical treatment of ventricular 
arrhythmias has been limited, implantable defibrillators and pace-
makers have been very successful. Severe end-stage heart disease of 
all types may require cardiac transplantation or an LVAD. In all 
of these conditions and treatments, cardiac rehabilitation has an 
important role to play. Some basic concepts to remember include 
that patients before transplantation are similar to patients with 
heart failure, whereas patients after transplantation have several 
physiologic changes that are unique, including high resting heart 
rate, limited increase in SV , and peak heart rate with exercise. The 
basic principles of cardiac rehabilitation are discussed as follows.13
Cardiac rehabilitation is either primary prevention, which 
includes risk factor modification and education before a cardiac 
event, or secondary prevention, which is cardiac rehabilitation 
after the onset of cardiac disease including both exercise and risk 
factor modification.
Primary prevention is usually performed in primary care set -
tings rather than a rehabilitation setting. The focus is on the reduc-
tion of cardiac risk factors with a combination of education and 
exercise for patients in the community. Primary prevention can 
have a profound effect on the rate of cardiac disease with a decrease 
in obesity, blood pressure, and lipid profiles.53,54,147 Ideally, behav-
ior modification should begin in childhood with the establishment 
of healthy behavior and then maintained throughout life. Because 
populations who are disabled are generally sedentary and may have 
other risk factors, primary prevention should be an important 
component of the care of the disabled and should include manage-
ment of hypertension and lipids along with encouraging exercise 
and consideration of antiplatelet agents. These are all cost-effective 
approaches and can decrease mortality and morbidity on a popu -
lation-based scale, in addition to the individual benefits.53,54,147
After an episode of cardiac disease, it is essential to have sec -
ondary risk factor modification, which includes all of the features 
of primary prevention programs discussed earlier. In addition, dis-
ease-specific education and formal exercise is a part of the second-
ary prevention program. In both cardiac and pulmonary disease, 
smoking cessation is crucial as part of both primary and secondary 
prevention programs.6,87,158 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation Programs
Rehabilitation programs for patients with pulmonary disease are 
similar to cardiac rehabilitation programs. After severe acute exac-
erbations, some patients can benefit from a short acute inpatient 
rehabilitation, but the majority of pulmonary rehabilitation is 
done in an outpatient setting. For patients who are in an inten -
sive care setting, early mobilization programs are now being used 
to limit debility in these vulnerable patients. 5,18,107 Outpatient 
pulmonary rehabilitation programs also have primary prevention 
for pulmonary disease with smoking prevention and cessation, 
occupational safety, and prevention of exposure to environmental 
and infectious agents. Secondary pulmonary prevention involves 
medication adherence and education, smoking cessation, supple -
mental oxygen use and education, and environmental modifica -
tion for known environmental triggers.75,110
For patients with ventilatory failure that cannot be supported 
with noninvasive ventilation, lung transplant may become neces -
sary. Rehabilitation before transplantation is focused on both the 
underlying condition and transplant-specific education, whereas 
rehabilitation after transplantation includes education and resto -
ration of muscle strength, which is impaired from the medical 
regimen for patients after transplantation.17 
Cardiac Rehabilitation of the Patient After 
Myocardial Infarction
The standard model for cardiac rehabilitation after MI was first 
described by Wenger et al.155 in 1971. Because revascularization is 
currently common and infarcts are smaller than in the past, there 
  Causes of Altered Lung Physiology
Restrictive Diseases Obstructive Diseases
Loss of inspiratory reserve
Intrinsic loss of inspiratory reserve
	 •	 	Lung	fibrosis
	 •	 	Pulmonary	hypertension
	 •	 	Pulmonary	edema
Extrinsic loss of inspiratory 
reserve
	 •	 	Chest	wall	rigidity
	 •	 	Neurologic	(central)	 
weakness
	 •	 	Neurologic	(peripheral)	
weakness
	 •	 	Chest	wall	restriction	from	
bracing
Increase in residual volume
Intrinsic increase in residual volume
	 •	 	Bronchial	obstruction	(acute	
asthma)
	 •	 	Airways	collapse	(chronic	
obstructive lung disease/
emphysema)
	 •	 	Bronchial	obstruction	 
(bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis)
Extrinsic increase in the residual 
volume
	 •	 	Neck	obesity
	 •	 	Tracheomalacia
  
TABLE 
27.3

--- PAGE 607 ---
518
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
  Summary of Goals and Methods of Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Goals Methods
Primary and Secondary Prevention
Smoking	cessation Smoking	cessation	programs,	emotional	support,	monitor	and	encourage	abstinence
Immunization Assure proper immunizations (flu and pneumonia), communicate with primary physician
Prevent exacerbations Disease education
Self-assessment	skills	taught
Self-intervention	taught
Instruct on accessing private physician
Appropriate medication use Review medication
Focus	on	inhaler	technique
Review dosing schedules
Review interactions and side effects
Focus	on	appropriate	use	of	inhalers	and	nebulizers
Pulmonary toilet Review bronchial hygiene
Teach	cough	techniques/huffing
Teach	appropriate	use	of	chest	physiotherapy	techniques	to	the	patient	and	family
Appropriate use of oxygen therapy Encourage acceptance of the need for O2
Appropriate use of oxygen at rest and with exertion
Review self-monitoring with pulse oximetry
Review oxygen equipment and appropriate systems for a given patient
Emphasize the importance of supplemental oxygen use and the consequences of failure to use oxygen
Nutritional	counseling Aim to achieve ideal body weight
For	CO2-retaining individuals, avoid high-carbohydrate diet
Maintenance of low-sodium diets
Encourage balanced nutrition, avoidance of fad diets
Family	training Disease-specific training
Pulmonary toilet and chest physiotherapy
Medication and oxygen use
Family	support	group
Counseling as needed
Dyspnea Relief: Exercise Training
Exercise Multifaceted program individualized to each patient’s needs
	 •	 	Strengthening Emphasis on gradual increase in strength with a focus on proximal muscle groups
Avoid injury to weakened musculotendinous structures that may have been weakened by disuse and medications
Focus	on	high-repetition,	low-intensity	training
	 •	 	Conditioning Aim to increase exercise tolerance with aerobic exercises
Cross-training program to avoid injury
Create an independent training program
Increase ambulation endurance with gait training
Appropriate oxygen titration during exercise
	 •	 	Respiratory	muscle	training	for	
selected conditions
Isocapnic hyperpnea
Inspiratory resistance training
Inspiratory threshold training
	 •	 	Upper	extremity	training Increase strength, focus on proximal muscles
Increase endurance for sustained activity, aim to decrease fatigue with ADL
	 •	 	ADL	training Energy conservation and adaptive techniques
Teach	anxiety	and	stress	relief
Teach	pacing	in	activities
Dyspnea Relief: Lifestyle Modifications
Breathing	retraining Technique	of	pursed	lip	breathing,	especially	in	obstructive	conditions
Diaphragmatic breathing
Anxiety reduction Stress	relaxation	techniques
Paced breathing
Autohypnosis
Visualization
Use	of	anxiolytics	as	needed
Evaluate and treat any underlying depression
TABLE 
27.4

--- PAGE 608 ---
519CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
have been modifications to the classical program with a reduction to 
three phases, eliminating the classical stage 2 recovery phase. A mod-
ern acute phase mobilization program is illustrated in Table 27.5.
The exception to bypassing the recovery phase for cardiac 
rehabilitation comes for surgical patients with sternotomy who 
may require recovery from their surgery before starting the train -
ing phase of rehabilitation. In summary, phase 1 rehabilitation is 
the acute phase in hospital immediately following a cardiac event 
and ends at discharge. Phase 2 is an outpatient training phase, 
with secondary prevention, intense education, and aerobic con -
ditioning. Phase 3 is the most difficult, the maintenance phase 
in which patients seek to achieve continued aerobic exercise and 
maintenance of lifestyle modifications. Risk factor modification 
is performed at all phases. This model is similar for patients with 
pulmonary disease. For patients with cardiopulmonary disease 
who are not hospitalized, the goal is essentially phase 2 and phase 
3 for all patients at the time of diagnosis. A more detailed descrip-
tion of each of the phases follows.
Acute Phase (Phase 1)
The basics of the phase 1 program are illustrated in Table 27.5. 
Education about cardiopulmonary risk factor modification is 
introduced at the time of acute hospitalization. For patients with 
cardiac disease, all acute mobilizations should be done with car -
diac monitoring with appropriate supervision by trained thera -
pists or nurses. A post-MI heart rate increase with activity should 
be kept to within 20 beats/min of baseline and SBP kept within 
20 mm Hg of baseline. A decrease of 10 mm Hg or more is indica-
tive of further medical issues, and exercise should be halted. The 
target intensity at the end of the phase I program exercise is to a 
level of four METs, covering most of the daily activities patients 
may perform at home after discharge.
For patients with pulmonary disease, similar phase 1 goals exist 
and there is new emphasis on early mobilization in the intensive 
care unit (ICU) to prevent frailty and deconditioning. Patients are 
aggressively mobilized, some while still on the ventilator. Innova-
tions, including extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, are also 
now allowing more aggressive mobilization of patients because 
sedation is less, and patients may maintain better nutritional sta -
tus. These patients with pulmonary disease should be enrolled in 
outpatient pulmonary programs to maintain their early gains and 
complete a full program of education and exercise. 
Inpatient Rehabilitation Phase (Phase 1B)
T o distinguish between patients who have a rapid recovery after 
their cardiopulmonary event (pure phase 1) and those patients who 
require either acute or subacute rehabilitation treatment before 
discharge home, the designation of phase 1B rehabilitation has 
been established. With advanced age or substantial comorbidities 
or other disabilities that make mobilization more difficult, many 
rehabilitation specialists will care for these patients in phase 1B. The 
guidelines for exercise are the same as they are for patients in phase 
1 but with a longer recovery period extending their hospitalized care 
to an acute or subacute rehabilitation setting before discharge. 
Training Phase (Phase 2)
Classically, phase 2 cardiopulmonary rehabilitation starts after a 
symptom limited full-level ETT for patients with cardiac disease 
or a CPET for patients with complex pulmonary disease. This 
allows for setting target heart rates and target exercise intensity 
from the exercise. A target heart rate of 85% of the maximum 
heart rate on an ETT or a CPET is generally regarded as safe for 
patients at low risk. Exercise intensity targets are lower for patients 
at higher risk or those with underlying conditions. In patients 
with life-threatening arrhythmias or chest pain, target heart rates 
are chosen that are below notable end points. Because hypoxemia 
can add risk and limits participation with exercise, it is important 
to provide supplemental oxygen as needed (up to a rate of 15 L/
Goals Methods
Improve confidence Build	compensatory	techniques
Build	confidence	in	ability	to	exercise
Provide ability to self-assess and learn disease management techniques
Disease Management
Disease acceptance Family	and	patient	education	regarding	disease	process
Coping skills Patient and family support group
Psychology and social work intervention as needed
Treatment	of	depression	as	needed
Quality of life improvement Simplify	ADL	management,	improved	coping	skills
Improve disease management strategies
Advance directives review Counseling regarding end-of-life planning
Establishment of healthcare proxy
Clarification of intention for resuscitation
Assistance in preparing paperwork
Encouragement Patient support group
Use	of	social	work	and	psychological	support
Continuing exercise and disease manage-
ment compliance
Multidisciplinary team encouragement
Physician (specialty and primary care) consensus
Family	education	and	involvement
ADL, Activity of daily living.
  
   Summary of Goals and Methods of Pulmonary Rehabilitation—cont’dTABLE 
27.4

--- PAGE 609 ---
520
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
min as needed) to maintain saturation greater than 90% for safe 
exercise. A target heart rate of 65% to 75% of maximum is safe 
and effective in a regular exercise program for patients at higher 
risk54 and, with target rates as low as 60%, still provides a training 
benefit. Monitoring also needs to be customized to accommodate 
the underlying risk profile.
Classically, a cardiopulmonary training program is three ses -
sions per week for 8 to 12 weeks. Cardiac rehabilitation is covered 
by most insurance plans, but the major limitation is a lack of refer-
ral and/or a lack of facilities in many areas. Creative and innova -
tive care delivery programs have been developed to increase access 
and include home programs (patients at low risk), telemedicine 
programs, and community-based programs in nonmedical facili -
ties. Because training continues after the 8- to 12-week period, 
it is important for patient self-efficacy that they learn to perform 
self-monitoring following the guidelines presented in standard 
references.55,83 Patients need to learn to begin exercise with a 
stretching session, then a warm-up session, a period of training 
exercise at designated intensity, followed by a cool-down period. 
The principles of specificity of training need to be remembered 
because training benefits generally are seen in the specific muscles 
exercised. 
Maintenance Phase (Phase 3)
Although the maintenance phase of cardiopulmonary rehabilita -
tion is the most important part of the program, it often receives 
the least attention. The benefits of a phase 2 program can be lost in 
as little time as a few weeks if a patient ceases to exercise. Because 
of this, patient education of the importance of making exercise 
a part of their new health habits has to be emphasized and the 
patient needs to integrate exercise as a part of a healthy lifestyle. 
T o maintain capacity, patients should perform moderate exercise 
at the target intensity learned in their rehabilitation program for 
at least 30 minutes three times a week. With low-level exercise, the 
frequency has to be increased to five times a week for maintenance 
of gains. Although telemetry monitoring is usually not used with 
patients with cardiac disease, patients with pulmonary disease can 
benefit from the use of home pulse oximetry and should be taught 
to adjust their supplemental oxygen as needed with exercise to 
maintain adequate oxygenation.16 
Cardiac Rehabilitation Programs in Specific 
Conditions
Angina Pectoris
Cardiac rehabilitation for angina aims to lower heart rate at rest 
and with given levels of activity to decrease angina by improv -
ing fitness. Exercise benefits for patients with angina include 
improved peripheral efficiency and improved coronary artery 
collateralization. 
Cardiac Rehabilitation After Revascularization 
Procedures
Postcoronary Artery Bypass Grafting
Cardiac rehabilitation after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 
emphasizes secondary prevention aims to improve conditioning 
and fitness. For patients with low ejection fractions and heart fail-
ure, closer telemetry monitoring should be done. If a patient had a 
sternotomy, arm exercises will have to be limited until sternal heal-
ing occurs, usually at approximately 6 weeks after surgery. Patients 
who have had percutaneous interventions usually pursue the pro-
gram immediately and it is similar to the program after CABG. 
Cardiac Rehabilitation for Patients After Cardiac 
Transplantation
Because most patients after cardiac transplantation have severe 
heart failure and debility before transplantation, involvement in a 
heart failure pretransplant program can help to limit decondition-
ing and help to treat depression and anxiety. Heart transplanta -
tion usually improves cardiac function; therefore a posttransplant 
program can focus on conditioning, education, and secondary 
prevention. An added feature is that many patients after trans -
plantation may have vascular and neurologic complications, 
which may mean a phase 1B program is needed before starting the 
phase 2 outpatient program. This is often done in either acute or 
subacute rehabilitation settings.
Remembering the alterations of cardiac physiology in the 
patients after transplantation is important. T ransplanted hearts are 
denervated and have no direct sympathetic or vagal central regula-
tion. In many patients, the loss of vagal inhibition creates a resting 
tachycardia of 100 to 110 beats/min. By contrast, because there 
is a loss sympathetic innervation, the chronotropic response to 
exercise is in response to circulating catecholamines, leading to a 
  Acute Phase I In-Hospital Cardiac Mobilization 
Program
Day Activity
Day 1 Passive ROM, ankle pumps, introduction to the program, 
self-feeding
Progress to dangle at side of bed, initiate patient education
Progress to active assisted ROM, sitting upright in a chair, light 
recreation and use of bedside commode
Increased sitting time by the end of the day, light activities 
with minimum resistance, continue patient education
Progress to light activities with moderate resistance,  
unlimited sitting, seated ADLs by end of first day
Day 2 Increased resistance, walking to bathroom, standing ADLs, up 
to 1-hour-long group meetings
Progress walking up to 100 feet, standing warm-up exercises
Begin	walking	down	stairs	(not	up),	continued	education
Progress exercise program with a review of energy  
conservation and pacing techniques
Day 3 Advance exercise to include light weights and progressive 
ambulation
Increase the duration of activities
Progress stair activity to climbing two flights of stairs, continue 
to increase resistance in exercises
Consolidate home exercise program teaching
Aim to safely walk up and down two flights of stairs (ensures 
safety for normal activities), complete instruction in home 
exercise program and in energy conservation and pacing 
techniques
Discharge planning and education
ADL, Activity of daily living; ROM, range of motion.
  
TABLE 
27.5

--- PAGE 610 ---
521CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
delayed and blunted heart rate response to exercise. Posttransplant, 
peak heart rates are usually 20% to 25% lower than in matched 
controls. Other cardiovascular effects that are seen include rest -
ing hypertension from the renal effects of calcineurin inhibitors 
(e.g., cyclosporine and tacrolimus) and prednisone, along with 
diastolic dysfunction in some patients.18 Combined, these effects 
usually reduce maximum work output and maximum oxygen by 
approximately one-third compared with age-matched individuals. 
Of interest, despite no denervation of the heart, similar decreases 
in exercise capacity are also seen in patients after lung transplanta-
tion.17 With exercise, patients after transplantation have a lower 
work capacity, reduced CO, lower peak heart rate, and lower oxy-
gen uptake and a higher resting heart rate and SBP than normal 
individuals. In addition, resting and exertional diastolic blood 
pressures are usually higher for patients after heart transplanta -
tion.25,142 The net effect of these alterations in exercise response 
is higher than normal perceived exertion, minute ventilation, and 
ventilatory equivalent for oxygen at submaximal exercise levels.
The focus of a cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program after 
transplantation is on conditioning and education. Target intensity 
for aerobic exercise is usually approximately 60% to 70% of peak 
effort for 30 to 60 minutes three to five times weekly. Intensity can 
be regulated with rating of perceived exertion target at 13 to 14 on 
the Borg Scale, approximately 5 to 6 on the modified Borg Scale, 
with the goal being to consistently increase the level of activity. 
Education focuses on learning the complicated medical regimen 
and vocational and psychological needs. For patients after cardiac 
transplantation, a program of rehabilitation can help to assist 
them to improve work output and exercise tolerance, with some 
patients able to participate in competitive athletics.71,73,74
Cardiomyopathy
Fortunately, cardiac rehabilitation for heart failure is currently covered 
by insurance plans, since Medicare regulations started to cover reha-
bilitation for heart failure in March of 2014 (42 C.F .R. § 410.49(b)
(1)(vii)). An important consideration for heart failure rehabilitation 
is the increased risk of complications such as sudden death, depres-
sion, and chronic cardiac disability. Closer monitoring of telemetry 
and vital signs is also needed because some patients with heart failure 
have inconsistent responses to exercise with increased fatigue, pos-
sible exertional hypotension, and syncope. Most patients also exhibit 
low endurance and chronic fatigue as a result of their low-exercise 
capacity. However, a positive effect can be realized in their fatigue and 
function with even a small improvement in Vo2. These changes in 
capacity can lead to a marked improvement in quality of life and may 
help patients with heart failure to continue to live independently.7
Because of the increased risk for complications in patients 
with heart failure, a graded ETT is helpful before starting a car -
diac rehabilitation program. Long warm-up and cool-down periods 
with gentle exercise at a limited workload helps to compensate for 
an impaired ability to generate a dynamic exercise response, and 
dynamic exercise is preferred to isometric exercise because isomet-
ric exercise can lead to an increase in diastolic pressure and cardiac 
afterload.34 Heart rate targets are usually set 10 beats/min less than 
any notable end point found with cardiopulmonary exercise test -
ing. Cardiac rehabilitation begins with cardiac monitoring especially 
when severe left ventricular dysfunction is present. Once the patient 
has demonstrated stability with an exercise program and has learned 
how to self-monitor, the patient should be taught a self-monitored 
program. Education of patients with heart failure also includes doing 
a daily body weight (to observe for fluid accumulation) and moni-
toring their blood pressure and heart rate responses to exercise.7
Patients who are on pharmacologic inotropic support or left 
ventricular mechanical support for end-stage heart failure can also 
exercise in a cardiac rehabilitation program with similar precautions 
to other patients with congestive heart failure.7 Rehabilitation after 
an LVAD usually follows a classical postsurgical course and may 
include phase 1 and phase 1B rehabilitation followed by phase 2 and 
phase 3 programs. Patients with an LVAD seen in acute and sub-
acute units require staff training, close cooperation with the LVAD 
team, and familiarity with the devices that are used locally. Because 
an LVAD often restores a reasonable CO, exercise tolerance is often 
only limited by the peak flow of the device. In addition to normal 
secondary prevention education, LVAD-specific family and patient 
education are also essential parts of post-LVAD rehabilitation.12 
Valvular Heart Disease
Cardiac rehabilitation for valvular heart disease resembles the pro-
gram for cardiac heart failure. Postsurgical considerations are the 
same as for CABG, with the added consideration of anticoagula -
tion for patients with mechanical valves. Because anticoagulation 
increases the risk of hemarthrosis and bruising, patients need to 
avoid impact exercises and need education regarding injury avoid-
ance.7 The overall training program is similar to that discussed for 
the patient post-CABG.7 
Cardiac Arrhythmias
An essential consideration for patients with cardiac arrhythmias is 
the need for telemetry monitoring with increases in intensity of 
exercise and new exercises. Patients at high risk can benefit from 
an automatic implantable cardiac defibrillator (AICD), which may 
offer protection form ventricular arrhythmias. Cardiac rehabilitation 
for patients with AICD needs to be done at intensities that avoid 
the heart rates at which the device is set to respond to ventricular 
tachyarrhythmias. An exercise stress test can help to set appropriate 
target heart rates for an exercise program. In addition to secondary 
prevention and education, AICD-specific education and emotional 
support are important to include in the rehabilitation program.12 
Cardiac Rehabilitation for Stroke
An emerging area of scientific exploration is using the cardiac 
rehabilitation model for stroke recovery and prevention.93,94 This 
is a logical extension of the effectiveness of the cardiac rehabilita -
tion model in reducing known coronary artery disease risk factors 
in regular participants. Because the risk factors for coronary artery 
disease are the same as the risk factors for stroke, it is logical to 
apply the same group exercise-based behavior modification model 
to a similar at-risk population. Participants must be screened care-
fully for balance impairments and muscle strength asymmetry 
that could increase the risk of falling in a group exercise setting. 
Asymmetric muscle fatigue must be scrupulously monitored and 
can contribute to degradation of gait or exercise form as exercise 
progresses. Subtle cognitive deficits may require close observa -
tion until it is determined that the stroke patient care set machine 
intensity levels accurately and independently. Meticulous blood 
pressure control must be maintained and may require more fre -
quent measurements than regularly collected in cardiac patients. 
Any questions regarding safe blood pressure range should be 
directed to the referring neurologist. This is analogous to target 
heart-rate range directed by referring cardiologist when indicated. 
High-Intensity Interval Training
A new and exciting area of emerging research is the conditioning of 
cardiac patients with high-intensity interval training (HIIT).124,156 

--- PAGE 611 ---
522
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
Following appropriate screening and evaluation, patients are 
enrolled in a traditional cardiac rehabilitation program. Once they 
are familiar with the execution of exercise intervals, an accurate setup 
of exercise machines trials of HIIT can be introduced. Patients are 
instructed to exercise at high intensity (>85% of Vo2max) for short 
or ultra-short intervals followed by low-intensity or rest intervals.126 
It is recommended to start HIIT training on seated machines to 
reduce likelihood of falls on standing machines due to loss of bal-
ance, distraction during interval initiation or termination, and diz-
ziness from blood pressure fluctuations. Meticulous blood pressure 
and telemetry monitoring should take place until the practitioner is 
confident they have established an individualized baseline response 
for each patient. Additional considerations are the potential for 
exercise-induced hypoglycemia—an expected and physiologically 
beneficial outcome. Symptomatic hypoglycemia can be quickly 
treated with any source of oral glucose. It is important to reassure 
cardiac patients that hypoglycemic symptoms are not the onset of 
cardiac ischemia to reduce negative associations with exercise. HIIT 
has been shown to provide significant conditioning benefits in the 
cardiac rehabilitation population with medically supervised selec-
tion of candidates.88 
Home-Based Rehabilitation
Demand for cardiac rehabilitation services is unable to keep up 
with the current and projected future supply throughout the world 
leading to innovative approaches to delivery included home-based 
and “hybrid” programs. 89,125,134 Numerous innovative models 
are emerging in both cardiac and pulmonary rehabilitation. 28 All 
models are initiated with an in-person evaluation and followed by 
various technology driven follow-up contacts. The telerehabilita -
tion approach allows one-on-one live supervised sessions or weekly 
coaching via video link. A less technology-driven approach includes 
weekly phone calls and reviews of self-kept activity logs that may 
also include additional communication via text message.84 Hybrid 
programs begin as a traditional facility-based, telemetry-monitored 
exercise program followed by rapid transition to home-based con-
tinuation.44 Most hybrid programs do not extend telemetry moni-
toring into the home setting, although with technologic advances 
this has been demonstrated in at least two foreign studies. 22,80 In 
addition, current technology allows physiologic data to be collected 
and relayed to the provider via wearable technology and app- or 
web-based interfaces. 85,96,141 Regular follow-up appointments, 
whether in person or via video link or phone call, are recommended 
to ensure continuity of care. It has been demonstrated that home-
based programs are not inferior to facility-based programs, but 
the medical literature is still developing regarding conclusions of 
superiority.64 Home-based cardiac rehabilitation is an emerging and 
exciting trend. There is a wide variety of solutions being explored 
throughout the international cardiac rehabilitation community. 
Exercise has been repeatedly demonstrated to be safe for patients 
in the cardiac rehabilitation population—extrapolation from this 
well-accepted practice is leading to new delivery methods to an ever-
expanding population.72,146,152,153 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation Programs in Specific 
Conditions
Emphysema
Rehabilitation for patients with COPD is the standard for pul -
monary rehabilitation. Goals of a pulmonary rehabilitation 
program include improving disease management and exercise 
capacity. Because pulmonary rehabilitation does not improve lung 
function, the goal of the rehabilitation program is to improve 
peripheral efficiency and decrease dyspnea. Energy conservation 
education (how to do a given activity at a lower level of exertion), 
anxiety reduction, and improved endurance all contribute to 
improved function and decreased dyspnea. Longer-duration exer-
cise of moderate intensity is often used rather than high-intensity 
exercise. Investigations have started to evaluate a possible role for 
HIIT for patients with COPD, but this has not yet been proven 
to be more effective than the standard training program. Because 
isometric exercises increase intrathoracic pressures, they should 
be avoided in patients with COPD. 16 Appropriate supplemen -
tal oxygen should be given to maintain saturation greater than 
90%, with education to lower supplemental oxygen after exercise 
back to baseline levels to prevent resting hypercarbia. Patients 
with COPD generally have relatively modest oxygen needs and 
can often maintain their oxygen saturation levels with 1 to 6 L 
of oxygen via a nasal cannula. Bilevel ventilation may have a role 
for patients with sleep apnea or ventilatory failure, and education 
for these patients should include the proper use of this modality. 
For patients being considered for lung volume reduction surgery, 
pulmonary rehabilitation is considered essential both to qualify 
for the surgery and after surgery to ensure adequate outcomes.16
Airway clearance and chest physical therapy has a role in the 
pulmonary rehabilitation of patients with substantial secretions. A 
combination of external percussion devices, vibration devices, and 
inhaled saline in combination with cough training and huffing 
may help to mobilize secretions. It is also important to include 
family training and education about inhaled medications, supple-
mental oxygen use, and management of equipment.117 
Interstitial Lung Disease
The basics of a program of pulmonary rehabilitation for intersti -
tial lung disease are the same as for COPD. An essential issue for 
patients with interstitial lung disease is often profound hypoxemia 
that requires high-flow oxygen with exercise to maintain adequate 
saturation for activity. It is essential in this group of patients to avoid 
chronic hypoxemia to prevent secondary pulmonary hypertension 
because the coexistence of interstitial lung disease and pulmonary 
hypertension can lead to a markedly decreased life expectancy. Exer-
cise intensity is often limited in patients with interstitial lung dis-
ease by oxygenation rather than dyspnea, and airway secretions are 
usually not an important issue. For some individuals with severe 
end-stage disease, there may be ventilatory failure with hypercarbia, 
but in those patients, rehabilitation may no longer be possible.144
Because interstitial lung disease is often progressive, transplant 
evaluation and education or end-of-life planning may be needed 
to permit as many patient goals as possible to be achieved. 
Pulmonary Hypertension
Patients with pulmonary hypertension have similar limitations 
as patients with heart failure and share many similar precautions. 
Effective medical treatment for pulmonary hypertension has made 
a once-fatal condition into a chronic disease for many patients. 
Patients with pulmonary hypertension currently have a much longer 
life expectancy, and improved functional status is essential for main-
taining an active life. Major concerns for pulmonary rehabilitation 
are preventing debility and improving dyspnea. Because hypoxemia 
can worsen pulmonary hypertension, it is important to maintain 
oxygen saturation with exercise, and cardiac monitoring may be 
needed for patients with a history of arrhythmias and right ven -
tricular failure. Education for this group of patients should include 
a review of their vasodilating medications and supplemental oxygen 
use. Intravenous and continuous subcutaneous vasodilator infusion 
is appropriate for a pulmonary rehabilitation program, but, similar 

--- PAGE 612 ---
523CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
to patients with heart failure, there may need to be long warm-up 
and cool-down periods. For patients with severe pulmonary vascular 
disease, the program should start with moderate- to low-level exer-
cise. Definitive research of the efficacy and safety of pulmonary reha-
bilitation for patients with pulmonary hypertension is still ongoing. 
Ventilatory Failure
For alert patients on either invasive or noninvasive ventilation for 
ventilatory failure, a program of pulmonary rehabilitation can 
help to increase mobility and prevent complications. Exercise pro-
grams for patients on nocturnal or intermittent ventilatory sup -
port aim to improve efficiency and decrease fatigue while off the 
ventilator. The details of ventilatory support for patients requir -
ing noninvasive ventilation is beyond the scope of this chapter. 
Table 27.6 provides an overview of the types of patients who may 
present with ventilatory failure. A summary of the indications for 
ventilatory support is listed in Table 27.7.29 
Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation in the 
Physically Disabled
As the population ages and more patients survive a disabling condi-
tion, there is an increase in patients with both physical disability 
and cardiopulmonary disease. An issue for cardiac rehabilitation for 
patients with dual disability is the impaired mobility that can impair 
both evaluation and participation in a rehabilitation program. Indi-
viduals who are disabled tend to have lower activity levels, which 
puts them at increased risk of cardiac and pulmonary disease and 
may present obstacles for a standard rehabilitation program for a 
person who is newly disabled and who has preexisting cardiopul -
monary limitations. For new-onset cardiac or pulmonary disease, 
cardiopulmonary rehabilitation is just as important and needs to be 
considered. Cardiopulmonary primary and secondary prevention 
also overlaps with the education needed for stroke and peripheral 
vascular disease and is especially important for patients with physi-
cal disabilities because they are often more sedentary with a higher 
prevalence of obesity and deconditioning. Finally, because mobility 
in individuals who are disabled requires greater energy expenditure, 
compromised work capacity from cardiopulmonary disease may 
impose an even greater degree of disability on an individual who is 
disabled than an individual who is able bodied.
Cardiopulmonary exercise prescription for individuals who are dis-
abled has to be adapted for the individual disabilities that the patient 
has. Individuals who have a lower extremity impairment resulting 
from neurologic or orthopedic conditions can perform upper extrem-
ity ergometry or use modified lower extremity exercise equipment, 
whereas an adapted bicycle ergometer or Airdyne may be helpful for 
a patient with hemiplegia. The higher Mvo2 requirements for upper 
extremity exercise compared with lower limb exercise should be con-
sidered to adapt the cardiac rehabilitation program for patients who are 
disabled. Patients who are disabled also need to focus on task-specific 
activities while increasing their aerobic conditioning and endurance, 
with a goal of lowering the Mvo2 for any given task. Because of the 
expertise in dealing with physical disabilities and understanding the 
mechanics of motion, physiatrists are particularly well positioned to 
lead cardiopulmonary rehabilitation programs for the disabled. It is 
especially important when many traditional cardiac rehabilitation pro-
gram teams are hesitant to work with patients who are physically dis-
abled because of their lack of experience with physical disability.120,147 
Conclusion
Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation is an area where physiatry is 
uniquely positioned to help manage the patient who is multidis -
abled, and the multidisciplinary approach is well suited to address 
the education and team management needed for successful cardio-
pulmonary rehabilitation. A goal for cardiopulmonary rehabilita -
tion is to increase the access to cardiopulmonary rehabilitation to a 
greater number of patients, including populations who are under-
served in rural and urban areas, women and minority groups, and 
patients with dual disabilities as they become a larger proportion 
of the patients seen with cardiopulmonary disease. 
Frailty
Movement and Function
Movement is an essential part of human life and is important for 
the preservation of function throughout the entire life cycle. Since 
the beginning of human history, a high degree of physical activity 
has been required to maintain a livable environment and to secure 
adequate nutrition to ensure survival. It is only following indus -
trialization, a relatively recent event from an evolutionary point 
of view, that the diseases and conditions associated with inactivity 
and immobility began to manifest themselves throughout human 
societies. Obesity and the resultant conditions of diabetes, hyper-
lipidemia, and decreased cardiopulmonary reserve have increased 
steadily throughout the past century. Much attention is focused 
  Causes of Ventilatory Failure
Central Hypoventilation Respiratory Muscle Failure Chronic Respiratory Disorders Other
Intracranial hemorrhage
Arnold-Chiari malformation
Central nervous system trauma
Congenital and central failure of control of breathing
Myelomeningocele
High spinal cord injury
Stroke
Central alveolar hypoventilation
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Congenital myopathies
Botulism
Muscular dystrophies
Myasthenia gravis
Phrenic nerve paralysis
Polio/postpolio
Spinal	muscular	atrophy
Myotonic dystrophy
Chronic obstructive lung disease
Bronchopulmonary	dysplasia
Cystic fibrosis
Interstitial lung disease
Kyphoscoliosis
Thoracic	wall	deformities
Thoracoplasty
Congestive heart failure
Congenital heart disease
Tracheomalacia
Vocal cord paralysis
Pierre Robin syndrome
  
TABLE 
27.6

--- PAGE 613 ---
524
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
on the “westernization” of diet, although less attention is focused 
on the “westernization of physical activity levels.”
As physicians concerned with function, physiatrists intuitively 
understand the dangers of activity reduction in all settings from all 
causes, both medical and environmental. In fact, often physiatrists 
are the only physicians who have familiarity with the maintenance 
of function via physical activity using therapists, nurses, and family 
members. The knowledge of how to modify physical and social envi-
ronments to maximize functional movement and overall function for 
their patients allows physiatrists to improve and maintain function in 
their patients. The physiatric focus on activities of daily living (ADLs) 
is an effort to return functional movements to an individual who is 
disabled, allowing them to maintain their baseline degree of physical 
activity required for autonomy and independent movement. 
Physiology and Consequences of Inactivity
The link between physical activity and cardiovascular disease has 
been well described since the 1950s, 102,103 when the relationship 
between workplace activity levels were directly related to higher 
rates of cardiovascular events. It is no surprise that less physically 
active daytime behavior (e.g., mail sorters vs. mail deliverers) 
affected the development of cardiovascular disease. A more inter -
esting finding is the strength of this association; primarily seated 
workers developed almost twice the rate of cardiovascular disease. 
More research investigating and elucidating the cellular biology of 
inactivity needs to be done until this area of physiology is as well 
understood as exercise physiology.
Currently, the global workforce is becoming more sedentary in 
numerous sectors as desk-based work responsibilities dominate the 
work day and after-hours couch-based recreational activities, includ-
ing home theaters, media centers, and ubiquitous social media, cre-
ate prolonged voluntary immobilization after work. In the United 
States the amount of daytime sedentary hours is high, as revealed 
by data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) database, which showed that 54.9% of waking hours 
in the population studied was spent during sedentary activities, 95 
with late adolescents and older individuals being the most sedentary.
Rising “sedentarism” is not only an American phenomenon. 
In Australia a large population-based study found that sedentary 
behavior (television viewing time) was positively associated with 
abnormal glucose metabolism and metabolic syndrome.35,36 More 
concerning is that these associations were preserved even when 
controlling for what would be considered active individuals who 
participated in sustained and moderate-intensity recreational 
activities. Prolonged physical inactivity appears to be a unique 
risk factor for maladaptive energy metabolism. In the future it 
is possible that number of hours spent sitting will be recognized 
as a risk factor for the development of cardiovascular disease. In 
the context of this discussion, these observational data support 
the hypothesis that the physiology of inactivity is a risk factor for 
poor health outcomes in numerous settings. This supports the 
idea that there should be a paradigm shift in how all physicians 
view physical inactivity in their patients, especially in the hospital 
setting where the physiatrist is in a key position to increase patient 
mobility.
In addition to increased cardiovascular risk, there are numer -
ous associations between inactivity and poor health outcomes, 
including the metabolic syndrome, deep vein thrombosis, obesity, 
and serum insulin levels.
Metabolic Syndrome
Although there have not been studies to elucidate the molecular 
biology linking prolonged sitting to metabolic syndrome, epi -
demiologic data are compelling. The metabolic syndrome is the 
presence of three out of five of the following findings: central 
obesity, elevated blood pressure, low serum high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol, high triglycerides, and elevated fasting glucose. 
Patients with this constellation of findings are at increased risk for 
the development of cardiovascular disease and diabetes.1 In recent 
years, the recognition of the metabolic syndrome and its pre -
vention has produced a rich literature specific to this syndrome. 
  Indications for Ventilatory Support
NIV Decision Tree Mild Moderate Severe
Clinical syndrome Substantial	daytime	CO2 retention 
(>50 mm Hg with normalized pH)
Mild daytime or nocturnal CO2 retention (45–50 
mm Hg) with symptoms of hypoventilation
Substantial	nocturnal	hypoventilation	
or hypoxemia
Clinical diagnoses COPD
Neuromuscular	disease
Moderate neuromuscular disease
Paralysis
Chest wall deformity
Central hypoventilation
Marked obesity
Severe	neuromuscular	disease
End-stage lung disease
Maximum medical 
management options
Optimal medication
Pulmonary toilet
Airway management
Avoidance of pulmonary  
exacerbations
Add management of secretions
Airway protection
Consider	nocturnal	NIV	rest	with	daytime	off	NIV
Treat	reversible	pulmonary	conditions
Maximize posture and other supports
Considerations for augmentative 
communication and ensuring 
adequate nutrition
Indications for  
tracheostomy over 
NIV
Uncontrollable	secretions Uncontrollable	secretions
Chronic aspiration and chronic pneumonias
Obstructive sleep apnea with failure to improve 
with continuous positive airway pressure
COPD with severe hypoventilation
Uncontrollable	secretions
Chronic aspiration and chronic 
pneumonias
Failure	of	NIV
Inability	to	manage	NIV
Patient/caregiver preference
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; NIV, noninvasive ventilation.
  
TABLE 
27.7

--- PAGE 614 ---
525CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
Prolonged inactivity (sitting) more than doubles the risk for devel-
opment of metabolic syndrome.41 Development of the metabolic 
syndrome has been shown to increase with each additional hour 
of sedentary television viewing, as opposed to having television in 
the background during other household activities.35 
Deep Vein Thrombosis
The correlation with prolonged sitting and development of deep 
vein thrombosis has been well described. 61 This can occur even 
in active individuals who are immobile for prolonged periods 
of time. Case reports from varied settings have reported seated 
individuals who developed deep vein thrombosis since the 1950s. 
These have included observations from air raid shelters, sitting in 
theater, sitting on extended airplane flights, and even prolonged 
sitting during video game playing.104,108 Presumed causes include 
rheologic changes and hemoconcentration.58,66 
Obesity
The relationship between physical activity and body mass index is 
supported by the medical and epidemiologic literature. In varied 
populations, pediatric, adult, or older adult individuals who have a 
lower level of baseline physical activity generally have a higher rate 
of obesity. Sedentary behavior is a reversible cause of obesity in 
all populations,9,38,135 and improvement of physical activity levels 
should begin with school-aged children.50,154 This is especially true 
because there is evidence that an obese child has a significantly 
greater likelihood of continuing life as an obese adult. 57,157 Even 
high levels of physical activity in athletic adults may not be able 
to compensate for the deleterious effects of sedentary behavior.68 
Insulin
Insulin resistance is a component of the metabolic syndrome, 
and thus it is reasonable to assume that an association would 
exist between amount of insulin present and sedentary behavior. 
Reduced leisure time physical activity levels are associated with 
higher levels of insulin at baseline.42
Numerous studies have demonstrated the relationship between 
prolonged sitting, obesity, and the development of type 2 diabe -
tes, an insulin resistance state. More interestingly, however, is the 
suggestion that insulin levels are elevated in individuals who have 
prolonged sitting, even in the presence of regular exercise.56 
Frailty Syndrome
The frailty syndrome is a recognized syndrome of decreased ability 
to adapt to stressors accompanied by reduced physiologic reserves 
and reduced energy metabolism. The frailty syndrome has been 
reported to vary widely depending on the population studied, 
ranging from 4% to 60%. 45 The frailty syndrome is clearly asso -
ciated with advanced age and becomes more prevalent in older 
groups studied; however, it is considered to be a separate syn -
drome and not a variant of normal aging. If it were considered 
the end result of normal aging, it would be reasonable to expect 
all individuals to acquire the frailty syndrome if they lived long 
enough, which they do not. The potential for confusion exists 
when the descriptor “frail” is confused with the frailty syndrome. 
A universally accepted definition or set of variables to diagnose 
the frailty syndrome has not yet been agreed upon; however, the 
conversation in the medical literature is ongoing and evolving. 
Substantial opportunities exist for physiatric contribution to this 
discussion because the frailty syndrome is defined in most tools as 
having a strong functional component.
A true consensus on the definition of the frailty syndrome 
has yet to be agreed upon internationally; however, the following 
findings are discussed in the medical literature as possible vari -
ables in evaluating individuals thought to be at risk for the frailty 
syndrome:
	 •	 	Increased	inflammatory	response
	 •	 	Decreased	cardiopulmonary	and	renal	reserve
	 •	 	Sarcopenia
	 •	 	Weight	loss
	 •	 	Exhaustion
	 •	 	Weak	grip	strength
	 •	 	Slow	walking	speed
	 •	 	Low	level	of	physical	activity
There are numerous frailty screening tools being used in a 
variety of settings. T wo of the most commonly cited tools in the 
medical literature include the Fried Frailty Phenotype and the 
“Rockwood Indices” from the Canadian Study of Health. These 
measurement tools can be of use to physiatrists depending on the 
practice setting in which they are used. 
Fried Frailty Phenotype
Fried and colleagues 45 at Johns Hopkins University developed a 
screening tool that identifies frailty based on a positive score in 
three out of five possible domains: weight loss, exhaustion, low 
physical activity, slow walking speed, and reduced grip strength. A 
positive response was assigned a score of 1 or 0 for each category.
Weight Loss
A positive value of 1 was assigned when participants responded 
“yes” to the following question, “In the last year, have you lost 
more than 10 pounds unintentionally?” Because there is consider-
able room for self-reported bias, follow-up measurements to con-
firm weight loss are recommended to confirm the initial findings. 
Exhaustion
T wo questions extracted from the Center for Epidemiologic Studies 
Short Depression Scale (CES-D 10) were used as indicators of exhaus-
tion: “I felt that everything I did was an effort” and “I could not get 
going.” Scoring was based on the strength of participants’ agreement 
with these statements. A positive score was assigned a value of 1. 
Low Physical Activity
Kilocalories per week expended were calculated with a self-reported 
description of voluntary activities adapted from the Minnesota 
Leisure Time Activity Questionnaire. This included questions 
about walking, chores, outdoor gardening, and numerous types of 
exercise. Interpretation of the answers should be clarified to ensure 
that negative answers are not based on different settings (urban 
vs. suburban) or culture. A positive value of 1 was assigned for 
participants with the lowest 20% of activity. 
Slow Walking Speed
Measurement was the time in seconds required to walk 15 feet. Stratifi-
cation by gender and height took place. The slowest 20% of the popu-
lation studied was defined as receiving a positive score and a value of 1. 
Reduced Grip Strength
Results were stratified based on gender and body mass index with 
values recorded in kilograms with a standard dynamometer. Par -
ticipants who scored in the lowest 20% after adjustment for gen -
der and body mass index were assigned a positive value of 1.

--- PAGE 615 ---
526
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
After scores are totaled, individuals who score 0 are considered 
“robust.” The presence of one to two of the criteria listed earlier are 
considered to be “prefrail,” and three or more positive criteria are con-
sidered “frail.” This phenotypic description has been correlated with 
notable clinical outcomes that are recognized as important in the 
geriatric population including falls, hospitalizations, and mortality. 
This clinical applicability and relevance to important measurable out-
comes has made the Fried Frailty measure a popular tool in clinical 
research. There are no laboratory tests or psychosocial components 
taken into account when determining a score with this scale. Using 
these criteria, Fried identified individuals who met the criteria for 
the frailty syndrome in 7% of the 4317 participants included in the 
Cardiovascular Health Study, 30% of the participants older than 80 
years of age, and 28% of the Women’s Health and Aging Studies.45 
Canadian Study of Health and Aging 
Measurement Tools
The “Rockwood Index,” also known as the Canadian Study of 
Health and Aging (CSHA) Frailty Index, and The Clinical Frailty 
Scale were both derived from the CSHA dataset, a prospective 
cohort of more than 10,000 participants. Both of these scales have 
been widely used in medical studies. The 70-item CSHA Frailty 
Index is driven by clinical judgment. This is a detailed tool in 
which clinical deficits are scored based on a 70-item index. The 
items include self-reported functional activities, mood, and motor 
symptoms, as well as signs and symptoms derived from medical 
history and physical examination. Each deficit is assigned a value 
between 0 and 1.0 to give a total score, which is then divided by 
70. Some examples of variables collected are listed in Table 27.8, 
with division into categories provided as a conceptual framework.
This index determines clinical deficits and allows scoring based 
on evaluating participants for accumulation of impairments. The 
Clinical Frailty Index was developed as an attempt to integrate 
clinician judgment into a formal and universally applicable model 
to evaluate frailty. The authors recognized that simply evaluating 
frailty based on a limited number of phenotypic variables may 
correlate with mortality but does not give considerably more 
information across all populations. Although it is of benefit to 
identify participants at risk for increased overall mortality, it 
does not guide the physician to develop interventions that can 
address specific and more importantly correctable impairments. 
The Frailty Index gives structure to an intensive review of deficit 
accumulation that can serve as a starting point for interventions.
These same authors recognized the utility for a shorter more 
clinically oriented scale that could be used by clinicians across 
numerous specialties. In 2005, they developed and validated the 
CSHA Clinical Frailty Scale. 67 This is a descriptive scale with 
seven categories from “very fit” to “severely frail.” It has been dem-
onstrated to be an effective measure of frailty and offers predic -
tive information about probability of survival and likelihood of 
institutionalization. This is a judgment-based scale that would be 
more applicable in the physiatric setting, whereas the more time-
intensive Frailty Index would give more specific information to 
a primary care provider or geriatrician. Both tools are validated 
instruments of benefit in the research setting (Table 27.9). 
Frailty: A Complex Syndrome
In addition to the functional, psychological, and musculoskel -
etal changes, there are also altered organ system and homeostatic 
responses in the frailty syndrome. These include a reduced capac-
ity to maintain homeostasis and an increased vulnerability to 
stressors caused by lower energy metabolism, sarcopenia, altered 
hormonal activity, and decreased immune function.
Changes in the endocrine axis, specifically the growth hor -
mone/insulin-like growth factor 1 (GH/IGF-1) axis, affect numer-
ous metabolic systems. Hepatic IGF-1 production is controlled by 
pituitary growth hormone secretion and is essential for normal 
metabolic processes in adults. Because growth hormone secretion 
declines with normal aging, IGF-1 levels also decline; this is often 
referred to as the “somatopause,”69 which accounts for the normal 
age-related decline in endocrine function. Decreasing circulating 
levels of endocrine hormones contribute in part to osteoporosis, 
alteration in muscle/fat ratio, and cognitive decline in addition to 
sarcopenia. There is an association between the frailty syndrome 
and abnormally low IGF-1 levels.91 Routine testing of IGF-1 lev-
els is not recommended because it is neither diagnostic nor cost 
effective.76 However, appreciating the metabolic setting in which 
the frailty syndrome is more likely to occur provides a framework 
for understanding this complex syndrome. In the Women’s Health 
and Aging Study, participants who had disabilities in mobility and 
disabilities in ADLs were more likely to have an increase in the 
proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6). 26 The combina-
tion of decreased IGF-1 and increased IL-6 could contribute to 
a theoretical shift from the normal slowly decreasing anabolic 
state of aging to a rapidly increasing catabolic state seen in the 
frailty syndrome. As the population ages, the incidence of the 
frailty syndrome will also increase. This complex syndrome will 
continue to be elucidated as advances in the molecular biology of 
normal aging progress. For the physiatrist, early recognition of the 
frailty syndrome may allow multidisciplinary intervention with 
the intended goal of preserving function as long as possible for 
these patients.
  Example Variables from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging Frailty Index
Medical Functional Psychological Neurologic Musculoskeletal
Lung problems Problems cooking Depression Tremor	at	rest Impaired mobility
Congestive heart failure Urinary	incontinence Delirium History of Parkinson disease Poor muscle tone in limbs
History of stroke Toileting	problems Restlessness Seizures Poor standing posture
Skin	problems Falls Mood problems Cognitive symptoms Poor coordination of trunk
Modified from Jones D, Song X, Mitnitski A, Rockwood K: Evaluation of a frailty index based on a comprehensive geriatric assessment in a population based study of elderly Canadians, Aging Clin Exp Res 
17:465–471, 2005.
  
TABLE 
27.8

--- PAGE 616 ---
527CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
Zero Physical Activity: Hospital Immobility
Traditional Hospital Practices (Bed Rest, Sedation, and 
Immobilization). There has been a long-standing culture of bed 
rest in hospital culture. The concept of “convalescence” is that an 
ill person’s strength returns gradually and is enhanced through 
greater than normal rest. This word is believed to have entered 
regular use in the late 15th century31 at a time when patients who 
were ill had few medical options other than rest. The deeply held 
belief that hospitals are places to “rest” influences sedation prac -
tices and encourages the overuse of bed rest despite there being a 
clear understanding of the dangers of immobility.
This is especially true in the traditional critical care setting. 118 
Long-standing provider beliefs include the idea that underseda -
tion during mechanical ventilation is painful, traumatic, and 
panic-inducing despite ample data to the contrary. 81,128 In a 
recently published study that explored nurse sedation practices 
in the ICU, 80% of nurses surveyed believed that sedation is 
necessary for patient comfort and 87% of the nurses surveyed 
would want sedation if they were ventilated themselves. 52 
Although some degree of sedation is usually required, 56% of 
the nurses surveyed believed that patients who are “spontane -
ously moving hands and feet” are undersedated. Although over -
use of sedation is associated with an increase in posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) 128 and prolonged mechanical ventila -
tion81 with the accompanying complications of total immobil -
ity, it is still a widely held belief in many institutions that “rest is 
best.” These practices lead to accelerated and iatrogenic decon -
ditioning resulting from immobilization.  
Iatrogenic Immobilization and Deconditioning. The dangers 
of immobilization have been understood for a long time ( Table 
27.10). The often-cited 4% to 5% loss of muscle strength for each 
week of bed rest was derived from studies that involved young 
healthy test individuals without underlying disease or musculo -
skeletal conditions.19 It is likely that the rate of deconditioning 
is even faster in older adult patients with multiple comorbidities, 
because ambulatory function and ability to perform basic ADLs 
have been shown to decline in one-third of hospitalized patients 
older than the age of 70 years. 133 Some of the complications 
of immobility include orthostatic intolerance, skeletal muscle 
changes, joint contractures, pulmonary atelectasis, urinary stasis, 
glucose intolerance, and pressure ulcers. 78 T raditionally, physiat-
rists have served as advocates for increased patient activity in the 
hospital setting because they evaluate and identify patients who 
can benefit from physical and occupational therapy. 
Early Mobilization
Rationale. The importance of early mobilization is well 
accepted as a “best clinical practice” in every hospital setting, not 
just the ICU. As the complications of immobilization became 
more widely understood, the importance of early mobilization 
throughout hospital organizations becomes a logical institutional 
goal, ideally approached through the quality improvement meth -
odology.18 Less universally agreed is how to design and implement 
a multidisciplinary early mobilization program and how to effect 
the accompanying culture change that is required for success. The 
physiatrist, working closely with colleagues in nursing, critical 
  Comparison of Tools Used to Measure Frailty
Measurement Tool Variables Scoring Utility
Fried	Frailty	Phenotype45 Domains of physical function Each of five domains is scored between 0 and 1. 
Higher scores represent greater disability.
0: “Robust”
1–2: “Prefrail”
3+:	“Frail”
Correlated with falls, hospitalizations, 
and mortality
Popular tool in clinical research
CSHA	rules-based	 
definition of frailty129
Rules-based ranking from 
fitness to frailty
0: Independent and continent
1:	Bladder	incontinent	only
2:	Needs	assistance	with	one	or	more	ADLs,	bowel	
or bladder incontinence, cognitive impairment 
with dementia
3:	Totally	dependent	for	transfers	or	at	least	one	
ADL, completely incontinent, dementia
Predictive of death or admission to an 
institution
CSHA	Frailty	Index67 Deficits-based ranking 70 deficits scored in varying increments from 
0–1.0.	Total	divided	by	70	to	give	an	index	score
Predictive of frailty and death
CSHA	Clinical	Frailty	
Scale67
Disabilities, comorbidities, 
and cognitive deficit–
based scoring
1: Very fit
2:	Well
3:	Well,	with	treated	comorbid	disease
4: Apparently vulnerable
5: Mildly frail
6: Moderately frail
7:	Severely	frail
Predictive of death or admission to an 
institution
CSHA	Function	Scale24 ADL-based scoring 12 ADLs scored as follows:
0: Independent
1:	Needs	assistance
2: Incapable
ADL, Activity of daily living; CSHA, Canadian Study of Health and Aging.
  
TABLE 
27.9

--- PAGE 617 ---
528
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
care, physical therapy, and occupational therapy is ideally suited to 
take a major role in the effort to bring mobilization to all patients 
who are hospitalized. The ICU is an ideal setting in which to ini-
tiate such a program because of the increased staffing to patient 
ratios, extended length of stay, and awareness within the critical 
care community as to the important role of physical medicine and 
rehabilitation in these programs. 
Culture of Immobility. T o successfully mobilize patients who 
are hospitalized, one must understand the many reasons that 
patients are ordered to bed rest and immobilization. Only then 
can the root causes of reduced patient activity be addressed. The 
concept of therapeutic bed rest can be a difficult idea to challenge. 
Therapeutic bed rest has been recommended for almost every 
medical problem at some point in medical history, including a 
variety of cardiac and pulmonary conditions in both the pediatric 
and adult populations. 21,46,60 In the intensive care setting, long-
held beliefs that the experience of mechanical ventilation was 
traumatic and frightening for patients gave rise to a culture of 
complete sedation and resultant immobility. The idea that patients 
who were unconscious would recover faster, “fight the vent” less, 
and be spared psychological suffering was essentially unchal -
lenged. Similar to the experience of patients with cardiac disease 
before unit-based cardiac rehabilitation efforts began in the 1970s, 
survivors of critical illness were profoundly weak with substantial 
disabilities resulting from their prolonged immobilization. This 
was often interpreted as proof of how tenuous their conditions 
were at the time of presentation, rather than the side effects of 
immobilization and oversedation. 
Culture of Mobility . The first step to increase patient activity 
is gaining the trust and “buy-in” of colleagues in medicine and 
nursing. The importance of having evidence-based discussions 
with colleagues cannot be overstated. The common ground of all 
healthcare providers is commitment to patient care and improved 
functional outcomes. There is currently a developing medical liter-
ature on the benefits of early mobilization.97,107,116 Journal clubs, 
consultative rounds, and a strong inpatient presence contribute to 
an understanding of the physiatric approach and will provide an 
appropriate venue for discussions about early mobilization. 
Physiatric Involvement. As a physician who understands the 
important role of physical, occupational, and speech therapy, the 
physiatrist is ideally suited to emphasize the vital role that these 
services play in the hospital setting. Because of hospital-bundled 
payments, physical therapy expenditures have traditionally been 
seen as cost centers and not profit centers by hospital adminis -
trators. T o address this perception, the physiatrist should be well 
aware of the importance and robust discussion taking place in the 
medical literature about the cost-effectiveness as well as clinical 
use of early mobilization programs in a variety of medical set -
tings.8,62,90,145 Familiarity with the current literature demonstrat-
ing the multiple savings to an institution is key in acquiring the 
resources needed to implement an early mobilization program. 
Having a physiatrist as part of the implementation team is optimal 
to represent the interests and contributions of the entire spectrum 
of physical medicine and rehabilitation providers. 
Ambulatory Devices. Hospitalized patients who use assistive 
devices normally are generally unsafe to ambulate without their usual 
devices while in the hospital. Because of staffing ratios and constant 
surveillance, ambulation in the ICU would not take place unassisted; 
however, in a noncritical unit a mobilization program would need 
accommodation for patients who can ambulate independently as 
well as with assistance. A recently developed Fall Prevention T ool Kit 
includes bedside signs identifying risks and required assistive devices 
if they are determined to be necessary for safe ambulation.37 In one 
study, 45% of falls were related to attempts by patients to reach 
the bathroom.150 It is logical that removing assistive devices from 
ambulatory patients entering the hospital will result in increased 
falls when patients attempt to ambulate independently. 
Training. Coordinated interdisciplinary training before 
implementation is essential for any mobilization program. 
Although early mobilization is often focused on physiatric over -
sight and physical therapy services, without appropriate coordi -
nation by all disciplines involved, successful early mobilization 
cannot take place. Multidisciplinary simulation training with 
case-based scenarios should take place in the unit where mobi -
lization is planned. All members of the healthcare team should 
have clearly defined roles before simulation training to experi -
ence the difference between standard multidisciplinary care and 
interdisciplinary coordination of care, which is at the heart of 
early mobilization. Unit-based simulation training, ideally with 
an actor as the patient, is optimal when possible. Cases provided 
should address medical emergencies and the challenges of physi -
cal coordination of care. Allocating time following simulation 
training for team members to discuss their experiences further 
facilitates the team-building experience.  
Treatment Considerations in the Critical Care 
Setting
Hemodynamic Instability/Orthostatic Hypotension
Patients hospitalized in critical care units almost universally have 
hemodynamic instability. The systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome causes peripheral vasodilation, cardiac dysfunction, 
capillary leak, and circulatory shunting leading to hypovolemia. 
A constantly changing cardiovascular environment makes daily 
  Effects of Immobility
System Impact of Immobility
Potential Functional 
Impact
Musculoskeletal Atrophy of skeletal 
muscles
Decreased core strength
Joint contractures
Reduced muscle power
Reduced standing 
balance
Shift	in	center	of	
gravity
Cardiovascular Deep vein thrombosis
Reduced peripheral 
vascular resistance
Orthostatic hypotension
Reduced venous return
Potential lower  
extremity edema
Pooling of blood in 
lower extremities
Syncope/presyncope
Venous stasis
Pulmonary Atelectasis
Pneumonia
Decreased vital  
capacity
Decreased endurance
Psychological Delirium
Depression
Posttraumatic stress 
disorder
Extended length of stay
Decreased activities of 
daily living
Chronic depression/
anxiety
Dermatologic Pressure ulcers Prolonged hospital 
admission
Modified from Kortebein P: Rehabilitation for hospital-associated deconditioning, Am J Phys 
Med Rehabil 88:66–77, 2009.
  
TABLE 
27.10

--- PAGE 618 ---
529CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
evaluation essential. As a result of vasodilation, patients who are 
critically ill may be unable to tolerate bed elevation, let alone 
seated positioning. Observing hemodynamic response to simple 
turning is a bedside test of hemodynamic tone that is easily car -
ried out by a single provider. Patients who cannot tolerate trunk 
elevation can be treated in a supine position with range of motion 
and progressive resistance. It is important for treating therapists to 
continually observe blood pressure response to intervention. It is 
strongly recommended that treating therapists consult with nurs-
ing providers to discuss any changes since last treatment resulting 
from rapid changes in physiologic state. With constant surveil -
lance and gradual progression, mobilization of the patient who is 
critically ill is unlikely to produce any unexpected events.18 
Ventilatory Dependence
Hypoxemic failure causes numerous pathophysiologic effects cul-
minating in requirement for ventilator support. These include 
hypoxemic failure caused by ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mis -
match, shunting, and altered oxygen exchange properties. Hyper-
capnic failure causes decreased minute ventilation relative to 
physiologic demand, especially in the setting of critical illness 
complicated by increased dead space ventilation. Coordination of 
therapy in conjunction with ventilator management should take 
place between physical medicine and rehabilitation and respiratory 
therapy. In some cases, therapists may be given parameters by the 
primary team as to titration of oxygen during treatment sessions. 
Oxygen titration should always take place in coordination with 
respiratory therapy or nursing. Similar to hemodynamic monitor-
ing, ventilator status and oxygen saturation can vary quickly in 
response to activity and should be monitored at all times. During 
active ambulation, a respiratory therapist is essential to monitor 
oxygenation and the position of an endotracheal tube. 
Postparalytic/Intensive Care Unit–Acquired Weakness
ICU-acquired weakness is common following hospitalization in 
the intensive care setting. Approximately 50% of patients with 
prolonged mechanical ventilation, sepsis, or organ failure have 
some degree of neuromuscular dysfunction. 143 The presence of 
ICU-acquired weakness can cause abnormalities at any point 
in the gait cycle. Endurance is reduced in all patients following 
prolonged bed rest with or without paralytics. Ambulation trials 
should begin with standing at bedside and progress only out of the 
patient room once the entire team is assembled. This will ensure 
patient safety and continuous monitoring in the face of global 
weakness. Early and aggressive physical therapy intervention has 
been shown to improve recovery of muscle strength in patients in 
the ICU.18,140 
Psychology of the Patient in the Intensive Care Unit
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Survivors of critical illness often have symptoms of PTSD. In a 
recently published study, 35% of ICU survivors following admis-
sion for acute lung injury reported PTSD symptoms during the 
2-year period following critical care admission. 20 Symptoms of 
PTSD can be persistent, given that 62% of patients who reported 
symptoms confirmed their persistence at 24 months. Of these, 
50% had taken psychiatric medications and 40% had seen a psy -
chiatrist since hospital discharge.20 Clearly, the complications fol-
lowing an episode of critical illness are multifactorial. Although it 
is too early to definitively state that early mobilization programs 
reduce symptoms of PTSD, it is likely that the benefits of such a 
program include reduced psychiatric complications. 
Delirium
Delirium in the intensive care setting frequently complicates 
patients’ hospital courses with resulting negative health outcomes. 
It is important that all providers in the intensive care setting rec -
ognize delirium and understand how it can impact on early mobi-
lization programs. By definition, delirium is a change in cognitive 
function hallmarked by a fluctuating course over a short period of 
time (hours to days). 3 In the critical care setting, delirium is not 
just a descriptive term; it is a measurable medical syndrome asso -
ciated with poor outcomes. The Confusion Assessment Method 
(CAM) and CAM-S (short form) are measurement tools that have 
been validated for use in this setting.65
It is important for therapists to understand that the interven -
tions the provider has been shown reduce delirium and improve 
functional outcomes. 138 Recent critical care practice guidelines 
state, “We recommend performing early mobilization of adult 
ICU patients whenever feasible to reduce the incidence and dura-
tion of delirium.”11 For the rehabilitation provider, even though 
the fluctuating nature of delirium has the potential to interfere 
with physical and occupational therapy, it is essential that therapy 
intervention be provided whenever possible. This often necessi -
tates frequent reevaluations throughout the day until an appropri-
ate window of intervention can be found. 
Transition of Care
The importance of care transitions is receiving greater attention 
in both the medical literature and the administrative realm of 
hospital management. An appreciation for the impact of poorly 
structured systems to transition care from one medical setting to 
another has become an area of intense focus across the health -
care spectrum. T ransitional care programs have been studied using 
different combinations of licensed providers including social 
workers, pharmacists, nurses, and physicians with most of these 
programs showing some degree of benefit.27,77,111 The use and fea-
sibility of transitional care programs has been studied in varied 
environments where the transition begins including ICU, hos -
pital, nursing home, emergency department, and rural care cen -
ters.10,23,27,49,111 The effect of early mobilization programs on care 
transition has not been studied, but the current interest in ensur -
ing continuity of communication emphasizes the importance in 
developing and studying systems to ensure transition of physical 
and occupational therapy. Without attention to appropriate tran-
sition of care of rehabilitation services, the benefits gained during 
early mobilization are rapidly lost following transfer. This is an 
area of emerging interest that justifies research efforts on the part 
of all disciplines involved in early mobilization programs. 
Application to Patients Not in the Intensive Care Unit
Although the importance of early mobilization in the critical care 
setting has received substantial attention, the principles of early 
mobilization are applicable throughout the healthcare continuum. 
Evaluating patients at risk for immobility or reduced mobility fol-
lowed by appropriate referral to trained providers can increase 
patient activity levels throughout a medical system. The type of 
provider selected is determined by the degree of assistance required 
for a patient to safely increase their activity level. In the hospital 
setting, “bed rest” orders should be replaced by systemized evalu-
ations regarding safe patient activity levels. Allowing patients who 
are hospitalized to use bedside commodes and assistive devices 
where appropriate is an economical way to increase patient activ -
ity without skilled intervention. Providing assistive devices to 
appropriate and carefully selected patients who are hospitalized 

--- PAGE 619 ---
530
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
can increase mobility and reduce incidence of falls in the context 
of a structured fall-prevention program.37
Community Mobilization
Healthy People 2020 . The US Department of Health and 
Human Services has initiated five “Healthy People” initiatives since 
1979. These are comprehensive public health programs designed to 
provide structure and guidance to achieve more than 1200 objectives 
to improve the health of all Americans. Each health objective has a 
reliable data source, baseline measurement, and target for specific 
improvements to be achieved by the year 2020 (Table 27.11).113
The Healthy People 2020 website is a rich resource that includes 
leading health indicators, tips and tools for implementation of pro-
grams, and a consortium of organizations and agencies committed 
to achieving the Healthy People 2020 goals.113 Community mobi-
lization programs can play a role in achieving targets for some of the 
most important leading health indicators listed as follows. 
Wellness Centers. Chronic diseases and their cost are respon -
sible for approximately 75% of US healthcare costs. 122 The Pre-
vention and Public Health Fund was established by the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 to administer the 
Community T ransformation Grant program. More than 60 grant-
ees have been funded to support Americans in adopting healthier 
lifestyles including healthy eating, active living, and tobacco-free 
living. Funding opportunities exist within this new structure to 
explore evidence-based community wellness initiatives.
Although the causes of preventable chronic diseases in the 
United States are clear (cigarette use, lack of physical activity, 
calorie-dense/nutrient-poor dietary patterns), the solutions are 
as varied as the communities throughout the country. There are 
many unique and innovative programs that intervene at different 
stages of the disease process. Preventative programs are some of the 
most appealing as long as the cost-benefit ratio strongly supports 
ongoing investment. Some programs may involve disease-specific 
secondary prevention, such as a traditional cardiac rehabilitation 
program. Others may be more broadly based and focus on increas-
ing fitness in the context of a community. 51 Although wellness 
programs with general physical activity goals may be common 
in senior centers, some of the most innovative approaches to the 
overarching problem of obesity in the United States are taking 
place in community centers with a focus on modifying heath 
behavior in the context of community-based family education and 
counseling. The Growing Right Onto Wellness (GROW) pro -
gram in Nashville, T ennessee, represents an innovative program 
with a population of 600 parent-child pairs who received educa -
tional interventions from 2013 to 2016 with a goal of preventing 
childhood obesity from developing in children.
Wellness centers can be freestanding but with community 
resources (community centers, houses of worship, schools, and 
employers) because locations for population-specific wellness pro-
grams are an efficient way to improve health outcomes.
Regardless of the population being targeted, all wellness pro -
grams can be developed based on a standard approach, listed as 
follows:  
Step 1: Organize Advocates and Advisors
Wellness programs are multidisciplinary in nature. Identifying 
a group of committed and interested leaders and creating a 
working group is a logical first step. Having the input and 
involvement of advocate community members at an early 
stage can improve awareness and uptake in later stages.
Step 2: Determine the Target Population
The most common wellness programs are either community 
or workplace based in scope. A work-based program will by 
definition be multidisciplinary. A physiatrist would be ideally 
suited to spearhead this type of intervention within a medical 
center based on their understanding of function, occupation-
al health concerns, and expertise in multidisciplinary work.
Step 3: Needs Assessment via Health Risk Appraisal
Surveying the target population by questionnaire will yield the 
most accurate and direct information regarding what types 
of conditions a population is at risk for. This in turn will 
guide the development of appropriate interventions. In the 
community setting, an open forum or informal sampling of 
health concerns and interests can serve the same purpose. A 
needs assessment survey is also an opportunity to determine 
the preferences and interests of the target community. For 
example, there are numerous ways to increase physical ac -
tivity levels. Early identification of prevailing interests will 
guide the working group to direct its efforts where they will 
yield the greatest participation.
Step 4: Identify Health Goals for Intervention
Information from Health Risk Appraisals will direct the priori-
ties for each organization or community. Some examples in-
clude: Exercise/Physical Fitness, T obacco Reduction, Stress 
Management, Back Care, Nutrition, Weight Control, and 
Mental Health. There is no way to predict what topics will 
be of importance to a population without sampling opin -
ion. In a 1994 study that queried medical students regard -
ing priorities for a health promotion program, 49% were 
interested in financial planning initiatives and only 12% 
were interested in alcohol and drug abuse programming.139 
Targeted polling will inform where resources should be di -
rected for maximum impact.
Step 5: Community Outreach and Resource Identification
All communities have resources: human, physical, and fi -
nancial. Identifying available space, facilities, and activity 
leaders will clarify what types of programs are possible to 
develop. Publicizing the need for a service, provider, or pro-
graming space may identify participants who are willing to 
create programs of interest at little to no cost. Community 
leaders including those of faith-based organizations, politi -
  Healthy People 2020 Leading Health Indicator Target Goals
Physical Activity Adult Obesity Obesity in Children/Adolescents
20% of adults 18+ meet the current 
federal physical activity guidelines
Reduce incidence of obese adults by 14% from 
36% to 30% by 2020
Reduce incidence of obese children between ages 2 and 19 
years from 17% to 15%
Goal met Goal not met Goal not met
  
TABLE 
27.11

--- PAGE 620 ---
531CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
cal organizations, unions, and neighborhood organizations 
are often well aware of what resources are available for use. 
If community leaders have been involved from inception, 
they are more likely to be a committed stakeholder.
Step 6: Program Development
After analyzing community data, preferences, and resources, 
the project leadership should be able to draft an initial plan 
with staged interventions and a time line for deployment. 
Having a written document of program components, ex -
pected outcomes, and desired metrics before beginning will 
not ensure success, but it will create a structure where lead-
ership can learn from experience what is working and what 
needs to be adjusted. There are ample resources available at 
the Wellness Council of America website: www.Welcoa.org.
Step 7: Evaluation Plan
Every intervention must have an evaluation plan before deploy-
ment. Specific data sampling methods should be agreed upon 
before implementation as should meetings to review and inter-
pret collected data. There should be object measures collected 
on a regular basis that are reviewed by leadership to determine 
if goals are being met and, if not, what action is necessary.
Step 8: Incentive Plan
Human behavior is driven by reinforcement. Creating sustain-
able incentives (e.g., t-shirts vs. weekend getaways) will con-
tribute to success over time. Newsletters, parties, recogni -
tion meals, snacks, and gift cards are all popular workplace 
incentives that have the added value of increasing visibility 
of a new program for nonparticipants. Workplace competi-
tion can be a healthy way to promote a program, especially 
if a substantial incentive is being offered as reward to the 
winning team. Geographic competitions, departmental 
teams, and intradisciplinary teams can all contribute to em-
ployee “buy-in” and team building.
Step 9: Implementation
Before implementation, additional community members, divi-
sion heads, or other leaders should be included as part of the 
implementation team. It is just as challenging to develop 
programs with too many members as it is to implement a 
program launch with too few members on the launch team. 
Leaving some choices to be decided by the entire imple -
mentation team will improve participation and sense of 
involvement for all team members, leading to better enthu-
siasm and community participation following deployment.  
Spearheading or participating in implementation of an 
employee wellness program can be a gratifying and worthwhile 
way to improve function on a population level rather than at the 
individual level. Highlighting the importance of the unique phys-
iatric approach in the healthcare setting, as well as educating com-
munities as to the important role physiatrists can play in keeping 
their community members healthy and active, are additional ben-
efits to involvement in these types of programs. 
Renal Failure
Physiology of Renal Failure
Scientific advances have expanded our understanding of what 
constitutes renal failure. Once thought to be solely attributable 
to volume overload, urea buildup, and hypocalcemia, it is cur -
rently known that uremia is a complex syndrome caused by the 
accumulation of organic waste products, some of which have yet 
to be identified. Hemodialysis cannot fully duplicate the complex 
actions of the nephron, which filters blood, reabsorbs water and 
solutes, secretes toxic substances, and excretes essential hormones.
Chronic kidney damage leading to kidney failure has numerous 
causes; however, the most common causes are uncontrolled hyper-
tension, poorly controlled diabetes, and glomerulonephritis. 137 
Uncontrolled hypertension leads to nephrosclerosis, or localized 
damage to the glomeruli. There are two proposed mechanisms of 
hypertensive nephrosclerosis, the first glomerular ischemia and the 
second hypertension-induced damage and resultant hyperfiltration. 
Diabetic glomerulopathy has excessive extracellular matrix as the 
most important pathologic feature. Glomerulonephritis can be pri-
mary or secondary, each of which has many causes, a full discussion 
of which is beyond the scope of this chapter. Infections, immune 
diseases, and vasculitides can all cause primary glomerulonephritis 
with resulting scarring of the nephrons. Secondary causes include 
diabetes, hypertension, and lupus, among others.
Alternatively, chronic kidney disease can be classified based on 
the anatomic part of the nephron that is affected. Glomerular, 
interstitial, tubulointerstitial, vascular, and obstructive are all ana-
tomic classification examples that are listed in Table 27.12. Fluid 
overload with hypertension can occur when the glomerular filtra-
tion rate falls below 60 mL/min.
Hyperkalemia
The ability to maintain normal potassium levels is preserved until 
the glomerular filtration rate reaches approximately 10% of normal. 
Although patients with chronic kidney failure can secrete potas -
sium until an advanced stage of renal failure, the rate of excretion is 
reduced, causing prolonged elevations in potassium following inges-
tion. Caution must be used when a patient is noted to be receiving 
spironolactone. Spironolactone is an aldosterone agonist that can 
result in dangerous hyperkalemia if not monitored closely. 
Hyponatremia
Sodium metabolism is maintained until renal failure becomes 
advanced. As renal failure progresses, the ability to conserve 
sodium is compromised, resulting in hyponatremia. 
Uremia
Uremia literally means “urine in the blood.” It is a general term 
that began to be used before the understanding that end-stage kid-
ney disease was more complex than just the inability to filter urea 
from the blood. As nephrons die, the remaining units increase 
their capacity in a process known as compensatory hyperfiltra -
tion.136 Increased glomerular permeability is another adaptation 
to the reduced number of functioning nephrons. 
Metabolic Issues
Metabolic acidosis is caused by the reduced ability of the failing 
kidney to excrete acid.119 This is exacerbated by decreased ability 
to resorb bicarbonate. Bicarbonate serves as the main pH buffer in 
the body and is derived from bone stores. 
Bone Issues
Hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia is loss of calcitriol and leads to 
decreased calcium absorption and stimulation of parathyroid hor-
mone release. 
Hyperphosphatemia. Hyperphosphatemia is caused by 
impaired excretion. In the face of abnormal bone metabolism, soft 
tissues became the phosphate reservoir, causing increased vascular 

--- PAGE 621 ---
532
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
calcification. This leads to increasing pulse pressure in advanced 
disease. 
Weakness
Anemia of chronic disease resulting from decreased erythropoietin 
and iron deficiency contributes to fatigue and weakness. Supple -
mentation with erythropoietin is recommended and overseen by 
the primary nephrologist. 
Debility
Studies have shown that a glomerular filtration rate of less than 60 
mL/min is associated with reduced well-being and overall func -
tion.106,127 Patients who are dependent on dialysis have multiple 
possible sources of debility depending on the type of dialysis they 
receive. Peritoneal dialysis using the peritoneum as a membranous 
filter typically takes place in the patient’s home, causing less func-
tional impact than hemodialysis, a facility-based intervention. 
Both methods of dialysis have potential for infection resulting 
from indwelling catheters, but peritoneal dialysis is more likely 
to be complicated by subacute bacterial peritonitis as opposed to 
bacteremia in hemodialysis. SBP is more likely to result in hos -
pitalization, whereas hemodynamically stable bacteremia will be 
treated on an outpatient basis with antibiotics and with less likeli-
hood of iatrogenic complications during hospitalization. Patients 
who are hemodialysis dependent often report substantial fatigue 
following dialysis sessions; this impacts on their ability to partici -
pate not only with ADLs but also with rehabilitation efforts. 
Issues of Dialysis: “Residual Syndrome”
The term “residual syndrome” has been applied to the syndrome 
of partially treated uremia, because dialysis cannot fully replace all 
renal functions. Electrolyte imbalances and the resultant acid-base 
abnormalities are responsible in part for the uremic symptoms 
that are seen in patients who are dialysis dependent. 
Sarcopenia/Uremia
Uremic sarcopenia has been described in chronic kidney dis -
ease.79,92 The presence of uremia causes changes in skeletal muscle 
fibers including mitochondrial depletion and atrophy of both 
slow- and fast-twitch muscle fibers.39,101,149 This in turn contrib-
utes to the overall sense of fatigue and weakness reported by these 
patients. The role of exercise in maintaining health-related qual -
ity of life and exercise capacity has been described, and patients 
should be enrolled in an exercise program whenever possible to 
preserve skeletal muscle function as soon as possible following the 
diagnosis of renal insufficiency.30,159 
Rehabilitation for Patients Before 
Transplantation
Patients with chronic renal insufficiency are often candidates for 
rehabilitation in both the hospital as well as outpatient settings. 
Chronic deconditioning resulting from uremic sarcopenia, a pre -
disposition to chronic pain and gait abnormalities, represents areas 
for substantial rehabilitative intervention.32,98,115 Patients on dial-
ysis should be instructed in a regular stretching program because 
of the potential for hip and knee contractures from prolonged sit-
ting. Patients on hemodialysis are at risk for a substantial degree 
of sedentary behavior as a result of extended immobility during 
hemodialysis sessions and postdialysis fatigue following dialysis 
sessions. Three hours of dialysis followed by 2 hours of resting 
while watching television constitutes up to 15 hours of additional 
sedentary time a week. Early referral to a rehabilitation profes -
sional for institution of a home exercise program before dialysis 
is warranted for all patients with uremia. It has been shown to be 
beneficial for patients on hemodialysis to exercise during dialysis 
sessions, although this is rarely standard practice. 
Early Mobilization After Renal Transplantation
Similar to cardiac transplantation, patients following renal trans -
plantation are substantially disabled as a result of a long-standing 
chronic medical condition: uremia instead of congestive heart 
failure. Although a patient on hemodialysis is typically more func-
tional than a patient with end-stage heart failure, the principles 
of preprocedure rehabilitation or “prehab,” posttransplant evalua-
tion, and coordination of rehabilitative care are the same.
Following transplantation, reduced mobility, prescribed cor -
ticosteroids, and a sedentary lifestyle during recovery can greatly 
accelerate debility even in the face of a normally functioning kid-
ney. Unlike cardiac transplantation, there is no expected increase 
in CO to boost energy metabolism. It is essential that all patients 
be evaluated following renal transplantation for potential rehabili-
tation intervention whether it be for aggressive mobilization and 
extended monitoring or for discharge to acute or subacute facilities.
Patients following renal transplantation have complex rehabili-
tative needs similar to patients who are critically ill in the medical 
intensive care setting. Both populations have multisystem organ 
damage, distributive shock, hemodynamic instability, and severe 
deconditioning and are at risk for functional decline. Unlike the 
medical ICU where a comprehensive early mobilization program 
may be implemented previously, the patient following renal trans-
plantation may be more reliant on physiatric consultation and 
coordination of care to receive required services. Applying the 
early mobilization model to this population would necessitate 
  Anatomic Classification of Renal Disease
Type Example
Glomerular Postinfectious
Viral
Rapidly progressive
Immune mediated
Membranous
Interstitial Autoimmune (systemic lupus erythematosus, 
Sjögren	syndrome,	Wegener	granulomatosis,	
Kawasaki syndrome)
Medication induced
Tubulointerstitial Numerous	conditions,	including	but	not	exclusively:
Autoimmune
Infection
Drugs
Vascular
Obstruction
Heavy metals
Granulomatous diseases
Vascular Renal artery thrombosis
Thromboembolism
Aneurysm
Obstructive Neurogenic	bladder
Blood	clot
Tumor
  
TABLE 
27.12

--- PAGE 622 ---
533CHAPTER 27 Acute Medical Conditions: Cardiopulmonary Disease, Medical Frailty, and Renal Failure
evaluation for participation with physical medicine and rehabili -
tation on postoperative day 1. Patients requiring ventilator sup -
port can receive physical and occupational therapy if sedation is 
interrupted long enough to participate with the treating therapist. 
Physical therapy is often automatically ordered for all appropriate 
patients postoperatively and coordination with the primary team 
should take place in the morning with an agreed upon time for 
treatment should an interruption in sedation be needed. Daily 
physiatric consultation and review of treatment session notes can 
guide expectations for the following treatment session. It is cru -
cial to ensure uninterrupted therapy at least three times a week 
because posttransplant physical reserve is reduced and potential 
for accelerated deconditioning in the presence of an immunosup-
pressive regimen that includes corticosteroids is substantial.
Outpatient rehabilitation programs following renal transplanta-
tion should focus on controlled conditioning and education regard-
ing the importance of exercise in maintaining exercise capacity 
and lifelong function. The same target heart ranges can be used for 
patients following both cardiac and renal transplantation: 60% to 
70% of peak effort for 30 to 60 minutes three to five times weekly. 
Rate of perceived exertion as described in the Borg Scale is a validated 
method to regulate intensity. It is important to provide consistent 
encouragement because patients following transplantation can be 
extremely debilitated and depressed. Advising transplant survivors 
that functional improvement may not be seen for 2 weeks or more 
following initiation of conditioning will help to maintain participa-
tion. A comprehensive rehabilitative program will offer numerous 
benefits following renal transplant. Physical therapy can be focused 
on achieving a baseline improvement to facilitate participation in 
activities that the patient following transplantation may have forgone 
in the face of declining function. Perhaps more than any other solid 
organ transplant, successful candidates for renal transplantation can 
hope to achieve maximum function with optimal rehabilitation.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation in Coronavirus 
Disease 2019
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by 
the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
has been the most significant public health crisis in 100 years, and 
it has affected all aspects of healthcare, including every area of reha-
bilitation medicine. At the time of publication, COVID-19 is still 
increasing worldwide, and with the high number of survivors who 
have suffered a severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) 
with prolonged intubations or severe pneumonia, the need for 
rehabilitation interventions has never been higher.26a Even though 
recent evidence has suggested that most patients hospitalized with 
COVID pneumonia can be successfully treated without mechani-
cal ventilation, there are severe pulmonary implications for many 
patients. All hospitalized patients should be discharged with clear 
recommended guidelines for safe and progressive conditioning at 
home as standard of care is now to provide medical oversight and 
guidance for patients at home whenever possible.1a,126a This has led 
to a rapid expansion of telehealth services across the medical con-
tinuum that includes all disciplines within physical medicine and 
rehabilitation even as the medical complexity of patients admitted 
to acute rehabilitation has increased.46a
The common admitting diagnoses to acute rehabilitation units 
during the pandemic has been deconditioning following acute 
hypoxic respiratory failure secondary to COVID pneumonia. A key 
principle guiding care of COVID-19 patients is the maintenance 
of adequate oxygenation at all times. For hospitalized patients the 
principles of early mobilization should be utilized whenever pos -
sible to prevent rapid deconditioning and further need for already 
limited rehabilitation services. 122a Oxygen saturation should be 
maintained above 90% with liberal use of supplemental oxygen. 
Continuous oximetry monitoring may be indicated for patients 
whose oxygenation level declines with trial mobilization on room 
air. COVID-19 patients have also been found to be at higher risk 
for venous thromboembolic events (VTEs), and baseline labo -
ratory studies for all patients admitted to a rehabilitation unit 
should include a panel screening for prothrombotic states that 
may indicate need for prophylaxis. Patients are at elevated risk for 
VTEs for an extended period following intensive care hospital -
ization for COVID-19 pneumonia, so a high index of suspicion 
should be maintained throughout the course of rehabilitation. 77a 
As the incidence of COVID-19 decreases and acute rehabilita -
tion units reopen, there will be ongoing opportunities to generate 
more objective data and high-quality literature on characteristics, 
complications, and outcomes of the COVID-19 population in the 
rehabilitation setting.
Key References
 1.  Alberti K G, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al.: Harmonizing the meta -
bolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International 
Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Asso -
ciation; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis 
Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity, 
Circulation 120:1640–1645, 2009.
 2.  American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabili -
tation: Guidelines for cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention 
programs, ed 4, Champaign, 2004, Human Kinetics, Inc.
 6.  Balady G J, Ades P A, Comoss P , et al.: Core components of car -
diac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: a statement for 
healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association and 
the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Reha-
bilitation Writing Group, Circulation 102:1069–1073, 2000.
 7.  Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, et al.: Core components of cardiac 
rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a scien-
tific statement from the American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac 
Rehabilitation, and Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Epidemiology 
and Prevention, and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; 
and the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 27:121–129, 2007.
 11.  Barr J , Fraser GL, Puntillo K, et al.: Clinical practice guidelines for 
the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients 
in the intensive care unit, Crit Care Med 41:263–306, 2013.
 12.  Bartels M N: Cardiac rehabilitation. In Stam H J, Buyruk H M, 
Melvin JL, Stucki G, editors: Acute medical rehabilitation. Bodrum, 
VitalMed Medical Book Publishing, 2012, pp 251–268.
 14.  Bartels M N: Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation. In Cristian A , Bat-
mangelich S , editors: Physical medicine and rehabilitation patient 
centered care, New York, 2014, Demos Publishing, pp 112–129.
 15.  Bartels M N: Pulmonary rehabilitation. In Cooper G, editor: Essen-
tial physical medicine and rehabilitation , T otwa, 2006, Humana 
Press, pp 119–146.
 17.  Bartels M N, Armstrong H F, Gerardo R E, et  al.: Evaluation of 
pulmonary function and exercise performance by cardiopulmo -
nary exercise testing before and after lung transplantation, Chest 
140:1604–1611, 2011.
 18.  Berenholtz S M, Needham D M, Lubomski L H, et  al.: Improv -
ing the quality of quality improvement projects, Jt Comm J Qual 
Patient Saf 36:468–473, 2010.
 24.  Canadian Study of Health and Aging Working Group: Disability 
and frailty among elderly Canadians: a comparison of six surveys, 
Int Psychogeriatr 13(Suppl 1):159–167, 2001.

--- PAGE 623 ---
534
SECTION 3   Common Clinical Problems
 26.  Cappola A R, Xue QL, Ferrucci L, et al.: Insulin-like growth factor I 
and interleukin-6 contribute synergistically to disability and mortal-
ity in older women, J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:2019–2025, 2003.
 53.  Hamm L F, Sanderson BK, Ades PA, et al.: Core competencies for 
cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention professionals: 2010 
update: position statement of the American Association of Cardio-
vascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 
31:2–10, 2011.
 54.  Haskell W L, Lee I M, Pate R R, et al.: Physical activity and pub -
lic health: updated recommendation for adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association, 
Circulation 116:1081–1093, 2007.
 56.  Helmerhorst H J, Wijndaele K , Brage S , et  al.: Objectively mea -
sured sedentary time may predict insulin resistance independent 
of moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity, Diabetes 
58:1776–1779, 2009.
 65.  Inouye S K, Kosar C M, T ommet D, et al.: The CAM-S: develop -
ment and validation of a new scoring system for delirium severity 
in 2 cohorts, Ann Intern Med 160:526–533, 2014.
 67.  Jones D , Song X , Mitnitski A, et al.: Evaluation of a frailty index 
based on a comprehensive geriatric assessment in a population based 
study of elderly Canadians, Aging Clin Exp Res 17:465–471, 2005.
 70.  Karvonen MJ, Kentala E, Mustala O: The effects of training on heart 
rate; a longitudinal study, Ann Med Exp Biol Fenn 35:307–315, 1957.
 75.  King M , Bittner V, Josephson R, et al.: Medical director responsi -
bilities for outpatient cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention 
programs: 2012 update: a statement for health care professionals 
from the American Association for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation and the American Heart Association, J Cardiopulm 
Rehabil Prev 32:410–419, 2012.
 78.  Kortebein P : Rehabilitation for hospital-associated deconditioning, 
Am J Phys Med Rehabil 88:66–77, 2009.
 81.  Kress J P, Gehlbach B, Lacy M, et al.: The long-term psychological 
effects of daily sedative interruption on critically ill patients, Am J 
Respir Crit Care Med 168:1457–1461, 2003.
 83.  Lauer M , Froelicher E S, Williams M , et  al.: Exercise testing in 
asymptomatic adults: a statement for professionals from the 
American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology, Sub-
committee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention, 
Circulation 112:771–776, 2005.
 87.  Leon A S, Franklin BA, Costa F, et al.: Cardiac rehabilitation and 
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease: an American Heart 
Association scientific statement from the Council on Clinical Car-
diology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and 
Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and 
Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity), in collaboration 
with the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation, Circulation 111:369–376, 2005.
 91.  Maggio M , De Vita F, Lauretani F, et al.: IGF-1, the cross road of 
the nutritional, inflammatory and hormonal pathways to frailty, 
Nutrients 5:4184–4205, 2013.
 101.  Moore GE, Parsons DB, Stray-Gundersen J, et al.: Uremic myopa -
thy limits aerobic capacity in hemodialysis patients, Am J Kidney 
Dis 22:277–287, 1993.
 102.  Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle PA, et al.: Coronary heart-disease and 
physical activity of work, Lancet 265:1053–1057, 1953.
 103.  Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle PA, et al.: Coronary heart-disease and 
physical activity of work, Lancet 265:1111–1120, 1953.
 107.  Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, et al.: Improving long-term 
outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a 
stakeholders’ conference, Crit Care Med 40:502–509, 2012.
 109.  Nici L, Donner C, Wouters E, et al.: American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society statement on pulmonary rehabilita -
tion, Am J Respir Crit Care Med 173:1390–1413, 2006.
 110.  Nici L, Limberg T, Hilling L, et al.: Clinical competency guidelines 
for pulmonary rehabilitation professionals: American Association 
of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Position State -
ment, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 27:355–358, 2007.
 114.  Oldridge N B, Guyatt GH, Fischer ME, et al.: Cardiac rehabilita -
tion after myocardial infarction. Combined experience of random-
ized clinical trials, JAMA 260:945–950, 1988.
 117.  Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al.: An official Ameri-
can Thoracic Society statement: update on the mechanisms, assess-
ment, and management of dyspnea, Am J Respir Crit Care Med  
185:435–452, 2012.
 120.  Peno-Green L, Verrill D, Vitcenda M, et al.: Patient and program 
outcome assessment in pulmonary rehabilitation: an AACVPR 
statement, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 29:402–410, 2009.
 123.  Qaseem A , Wilt T J, Weinberger S E, et  al.: Diagnosis and man -
agement of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a clinical 
practice guideline update from the American College of Physicians, 
American College of Chest Physicians, American Thoracic Society, 
and European Respiratory Society, Ann Intern Med 155:179–191, 
2011.
 127.  Rocco M V, Gassman J J, Wang S R, et  al.: Cross-sectional study 
of quality of life and symptoms in chronic renal disease patients: 
the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study, Am J Kidney Dis 
29:888–896, 1997.
 128.  Rock L F: Sedation and its association with posttraumatic stress 
disorder after intensive care, Crit Care Nurse  34:30–37, 2014, 
quiz 39.
 129.  Rockwood K , Stadnyk K , MacKnight C , et  al.: A brief clinical 
instrument to classify frailty in elderly people, Lancet 353:205–
206, 1999.
 130.  Rogers J G, Butler J , Lansman S L, et al.: Chronic mechanical cir -
culatory support for inotrope-dependent heart failure patients who 
are not transplant candidates: results of the INTREPID T rial, J Am 
Coll Cardiol 50:741–747, 2007.
 133.  Sager M A, Franke T , Inouye S K, et  al.: Functional outcomes of 
acute medical illness and hospitalization in older persons, Arch 
Intern Med 156:645–652, 1996.
 144.  Swigris J J, Brown K K, Make B J, et al.: Pulmonary rehabilitation 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a call for continued investigation, 
Respir Med 102:1675–1680, 2008.
 147.  Thomas RJ, King M , Lui K , et al.: AACVPR/ACCF/AHA 2010 
update: performance measures on cardiac rehabilitation for 
referral to cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention services 
endorsed by the American College of Chest Physicians, the Amer -
ican College of Sports Medicine, the American Physical Therapy 
Association, the Canadian Association of Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
the Clinical Exercise Physiology Association, the European Asso -
ciation for Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation, the 
Inter-American Heart Foundation, the National Association of 
Clinical Nurse Specialists, the Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses 
Association, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, J Am Coll Car-
diol 56:1159–1167, 2010.
 155.  Wenger N, Gilbert C, Skoropa M: Cardiac conditioning after myo-
cardial infarction. An early intervention program, J Cardiac Rehabil 
2:17–22, 1971.
 158.  Williams M A, Fleg J L, Ades P A, et al.: Secondary prevention of 
coronary heart disease in the elderly (with emphasis on patients 
> or = 75 years of age): an American Heart Association scientific 
statement from the Council on Clinical Cardiology Subcommittee 
on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention, Circulation 
105:1735–1743, 2002.
  The full reference list for this chapter is available online.

--- PAGE 624 ---
534.e1
References
 1.  Alberti K G, Eckel R H, Grundy S M, et  al.: Harmonizing the 
metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the Interna -
tional Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Pre-
vention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American 
Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Ath -
erosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study 
of Obesity, Circulation 120:1640–1645, 2009.
 1a.  Ambrose A: COVID-19 patient guide to at-home exercises, J Int 
Soc Phys Rehabil Med, 2020. [Epub ahead of print].
 2.  American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Reha -
bilitation: Guidelines for cardiac rehabilitation and secondary pre-
vention programs, ed 4, Champaign, 2004, Human Kinetics, Inc.
 3.  American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders , ed 5, Washington, 2013, American Psy -
chiatric Publishing.
 4.  April E W: The national medical series for independent study: anat-
omy, Pennsylvania, 1984, Wiley and Sons.
 5.  Bailey P P, Miller III RR, Clemmer TP: Culture of early mobil-
ity in mechanically ventilated patients, Crit Care Med 37(Suppl  
10):S429–S435, 2009.
 6.  Balady G J, Ades PA, Comoss P, et al.: Core components of car -
diac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: a statement 
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association 
and the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation Writing Group, Circulation 102:1069–1073, 2000.
 7.  Balady G J, Williams M A, Ades P A, et  al.: Core components 
of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 
update: a scientific statement from the American Heart Asso -
ciation Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention Com -
mittee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Epidemiology and Prevention, and 
Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism; and the American 
Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, J 
Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 27:121–129, 2007.
 8.  Balas M C, Vasilevskis EE, Olsen K M, et al.: Effectiveness and 
safety of the awakening and breathing coordination, delirium 
monitoring/management, and early exercise/mobility bundle, 
Crit Care Med 42:1024–1036, 2014.
 9.  Balboa-Castillo T , Guallar-Castillón P, León-Muñoz LM, et al.: 
Physical activity and mortality related to obesity and functional 
status in older adults in Spain, Am J Prev Med 40:39–46, 2011.
 10.  Baldwin K M, Black D, Hammond S: Developing a rural transi-
tional care community case management program using clinical 
nurse specialists, Clin Nurse Spec 28:147–155, 2014.
 11.  Barr J , Fraser GL, Puntillo K, et al.: Clinical practice guidelines for 
the management of pain, agitation, and delirium in adult patients 
in the intensive care unit, Crit Care Med 41:263–306, 2013.
 12.  Bartels M N: Cardiac rehabilitation. In Stam H J, Buyruk H M, 
Melvin JL, et  al.: Acute medical rehabilitation. Bodrum, Vital-
Med Medical Book Publishing, 2012, pp 251–268.
 13.  Bartels M N: Cardiopulmonary assessment. In Grabois M , edi-
tor: Physical medicine and rehabilitation: the complete approach , 
Chicago, 2000, Blackwell Science, pp 351–372.
 14.  Bartels M N: Cardiopulmonary rehabilitation. In Cristian A , 
Batmangelich S , editors: Physical medicine and rehabilitation 
patient centered care , New York, 2014, Demos Publishing, pp 
112–129.
 15.  Bartels M N: Pulmonary rehabilitation. In Cooper G , edi -
tor: Essential physical medicine and rehabilitation , T otwa, 2006, 
Humana Press, pp 119–146.
 16.  Bartels M N: Rehabilitation management of lung volume reduc-
tion surgery. In Ginsburg M, editor: Lung volume reduction sur-
gery, St Louis, 2001, Mosby-Year Book, pp 97–124.
 17.  Bartels M N, Armstrong H F, Gerardo R E, et  al.: Evalua -
tion of pulmonary function and exercise performance by 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing before and after lung trans -
plantation, Chest 140:1604–1611, 2011.
 18.  Berenholtz S M, Needham DM, Lubomski LH, et al.: Improving 
the quality of quality improvement projects, Jt Comm J Qual 
Patient Saf 36:468–473, 2010.
 19.  Berg H E, Larsson L, T esch PA: Lower limb skeletal muscle func-
tion after 6 wk of bed rest, J Appl Physiol 82:182–188, 1997.
 20.  Bienvenu O J, Gellar J, Althouse BM, et al.: Post-traumatic stress 
disorder symptoms after acute lung injury: a 2-year prospective 
longitudinal study, Psychol Med 43:2657–2671, 2013.
 21.  Black J R: Bed rest in heart trouble, New Orleans Med Surg J  
99:346–358, 1947.
 22.  Bravo-Escobar R , Gonzalez-Represas A , Gomez-Gonzalez A M, 
et al.: Effectiveness and safety of a home-based cardiac rehabilita-
tion programme of mixed surveillance in patients with ischemic 
heart disease at moderate cardiovascular risk: a randomised, con-
trolled clinical trial, BMC Cardiovasc Disord 17(1):66, 2017.
 23.  Cadogan M P, Phillips LR, Ziminski CE: A perfect storm: care 
transitions for vulnerable older adults discharged home from the 
emergency department without a hospital admission, Gerontolo-
gist 56(2):326–334, 2016.
 24.  Canadian Study of Health and Aging Working Group: Disabil-
ity and frailty among elderly Canadians: a comparison of six sur-
veys, Int Psychogeriatr 13(Suppl 1):159–167, 2001.
 25.  Cannom D S, Rider A K, Stinson E B, et al.: Electrophysiologic 
studies in the denervated transplanted human heart. II. Response 
to norepinephrine, isoproterenol and propranolol, Am J Cardiol 
36:859–866, 1975.
 26.  Cappola A R, Xue QL, Ferrucci L, et al.: Insulin-like growth fac -
tor I and interleukin-6 contribute synergistically to disability and 
mortality in older women, J Clin Endocrinol Metab  88:2019–
2025, 2003.
 26a.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVIDView: a 
weekly surveillance summary of U.S. COVID-19 activity. Updated 
May 29, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
covid-data/covidview/index.html.
 27.  Chapin R K, Chandran D, Sergeant JF, et al.: Hospital to com -
munity transitions for adults: discharge planners and com -
munity service providers’ perspectives, Soc Work Health Care  
53:311–329, 2014.
 28.  Clark R A, Conway A , Poulsen V, et al.: Alternative models of 
cardiac rehabilitation: a systematic review, Eur J Prev Cardiol  
22(1):35–74, 2015.
 29.  Clinical indications for noninvasive positive pressure ventila -
tion in chronic respiratory failure due to restrictive lung disease, 
COPD, and nocturnal hypoventilation—a consensus conference 
report, Chest 116:521–534, 1999.
 30.  Clyne N , Ekholm J, Jogestrand T, et al.: Effects of exercise train-
ing in predialytic uremic patients, Nephron 59:84–89, 1991.
 31.  Collins English dictionary: complete and unabridged , ed 10, 
Glasgow, 2010, Harper Collins.
 32.  Davison S N, Jhangri GS: The impact of chronic pain on depres-
sion, sleep, and the desire to withdraw from dialysis in hemodi -
alysis patients, J Pain Symptom Manage 30:465–473, 2005.
 33.  Dowman L , Hill C J, Holland A E: Pulmonary rehabilita -
tion for interstitial lung disease, Cochrane Database Syst Rev  
10:CD006322, 2014.
 34.  Dubach P , Froelicher VF: Cardiac rehabilitation for heart failure 
patients, Cardiology 76:368–373, 1989.
 35.  Dunstan D W, Salmon J , Owen N , et  al.: Associations of TV 
viewing and physical activity with the metabolic syndrome in 
Australian adults, Diabetologia 48:2254–2261, 2005.
 36.  Dunstan D W, Salmon J , Owen N , et  al.: Physical activity and 
television viewing in relation to risk of undiagnosed abnormal glu-
cose metabolism in adults, Diabetes Care 27:2603–2609, 2004.
 37.  Dykes P C, Carroll DL, Hurley A, et al.: Fall prevention in acute 
care hospitals: a randomized trial, JAMA 304:1912–1918, 2010.

--- PAGE 625 ---
534.e2
  References
 38.  Expert Panel on Integrated Guidelines for Cardiovascular Health 
and Risk Reduction in Children and Adolescents; National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Expert panel on integrated 
guidelines for cardiovascular health and risk reduction in chil -
dren and adolescents: summary report, Pediatrics 128(Suppl 
5):S213–S256, 2011.
 39.  Fahal I H, Bell GM, Bone JM, et al.: Physiological abnormalities 
of skeletal muscle in dialysis patients, Nephrol Dial Transplant 
12:119–127, 1997.
 40.  Flamm S D, Taki J, Moore R , et al.: Redistribution of regional 
and organ blood volume and effect on cardiac function in rela -
tion to upright exercise intensity in healthy human subjects, Cir-
culation 81:1550–1559, 1990.
 41.  Ford E S, Kohl III H W, Mokdad A H, et al.: Sedentary behav -
ior, physical activity, and the metabolic syndrome among U.S. 
adults, Obes Res 13:608–614, 2005.
 42.  Ford E S, Li C, Zhao G, et al.: Sedentary behavior, physical activ-
ity, and concentrations of insulin among US adults, Metabolism 
59:1268–1275, 2010.
 43.  Fox B D, Kassirer M , Weiss I, et al.: Ambulatory rehabilitation 
improves exercise capacity in patients with pulmonary hyperten-
sion, J Card Fail 17:196–200, 2011.
 44.  Frederix I , Solmi F, Piepoli MF, et al.: Cardiac telerehabilitation: 
A novel cost-efficient care delivery strategy that can induce long-
term health benefits, Eur J Prev Cardiol 24(16):1708–1717, 2017.
 45.  Fried L P, Tangen C M, Walston J , et  al.: Frailty in older 
adults: evidence for a phenotype, J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  
56:M146–M156, 2001.
 46.  Gascard E : [Importance of bed rest in pulmonary tuberculosis], 
Mars Med 89:405–407, 1952.
 46a.  Gitkind AI, Levin S, Dohle C, et al.: Redefining pathways into 
acute rehabilitation during the COVID-19 crisis, PM R, 2020. 
[Online ahead of print].
 47.  Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD): 
Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of 
chronic obstructive lung disease. 2011 update www.goldcopd.org/
uploads/users/files/GOLD_Report_2011_Feb21.pdf.
 48.  Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD): 
Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of 
chronic obstructive lung disease. 2014 update www.goldcopd.org/
uploads/users/files/GOLD_Report2014_Feb07.pdf.
 49.  Gonzalo J D, Yang JJ, Stuckey HL, et al.: Patient care transitions 
from the emergency department to the medicine ward: evalua -
tion of a standardized electronic signout tool, Int J Qual Health 
Care 26:337–347, 2014.
 50.  Graf C , Koch B , Falkowski G, et al.: Effects of a school-based 
intervention on BMI and motor abilities in childhood, J Sports 
Sci Med 4:291–299, 2005.
 51.  Gutierrez J , Devia C , Weiss L, et al.: Health, community, and 
spirituality: evaluation of a multicultural faith-based diabetes 
prevention program, Diabetes Educ 40:214–222, 2014.
 52.  Guttormson J L, Chlan L , Weinert C , et  al.: Factors influ -
encing nurse sedation practices with mechanically ventilated 
patients: a U.S. national survey, Intensive Crit Care Nurs  
26:44–50, 2010.
 53.  Hamm L F, Sanderson BK, Ades PA, et al.: Core competencies 
for cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention professionals: 
2010 update: position statement of the American Association 
of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, J Cardiopulm 
Rehabil Prev 31:2–10, 2011.
 54.  Haskell W L, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al.: Physical activity and public 
health: updated recommendation for adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association, 
Circulation 116:1081–1093, 2007.
 55.  Haskell W L, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al.: Physical activity and public 
health: updated recommendation for adults from the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association, 
Med Sci Sports Exerc 39:1423–1434, 2007.
 56.  Helmerhorst H J, Wijndaele K, Brage S, et al.: Objectively mea -
sured sedentary time may predict insulin resistance independent 
of moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity, Diabetes 
58:1776–1779, 2009.
 57.  Hills A P, King NA, Armstrong TP: The contribution of physical 
activity and sedentary behaviours to the growth and develop -
ment of children and adolescents: implications for overweight 
and obesity, Sports Med 37:533–545, 2007.
 58.  Hitosugi M , Niwa M, Takatsu A: Rheologic changes in venous 
blood during prolonged sitting, Thromb Res 100:409–412, 2000.
 59.  Holland A E, Wadell K, Spruit MA: How to adapt the pulmonary 
rehabilitation programme to patients with chronic respiratory 
disease other than COPD, Eur Respir Rev 22:577–586, 2013.
 60.  Holt L E: The importance of prolonged rest in bed after acute 
cardiac inflammation in children, Arch Pediatr 64:82–93, 1947.
 61.  Homans J : Thrombosis of the deep leg veins due to prolonged 
sitting, N Engl J Med 250:148–149, 1954.
 62.  Hunter A , Johnson L, Coustasse A: Reduction of intensive care 
unit length of stay: the case of early mobilization, Health Care 
Manag 33:128–135, 2014.
 63.  Huppmann P , Sczepanski B, Boensch M, et al.: Effects of inpa -
tient pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with interstitial lung 
disease, Eur Respir J 42:444–453, 2013.
 64.  Hwang R , Bruning J, Morris NR, et al.: Home-based telereha -
bilitation is not inferior to a centre-based program in patients 
with chronic heart failure: a randomised trial, J Physiother  
63(2):101–107, 2017.
 65.  Inouye S K, Kosar CM, T ommet D, et al.: The CAM-S: develop-
ment and validation of a new scoring system for delirium severity 
in 2 cohorts, Ann Intern Med 160:526–533, 2014.
 66.  Iwama H , Furuta S, Ohmizo H: Graduated compression stock-
ing manages to prevent economy class syndrome, Am J Emerg 
Med 20:378–380, 2002.
 67.  Jones D , Song X , Mitnitski A , et  al.: Evaluation of a frailty 
index based on a comprehensive geriatric assessment in a popu -
lation based study of elderly Canadians, Aging Clin Exp Res  
17:465–471, 2005.
 68.  Judice P B, Silva AM, Magalhaes JP, et al.: Sedentary behaviour 
and adiposity in elite athletes, J Sports Sci 32:1760–1767, 2014.
 69.  Junnila R K, List EO, Berryman DE, et al.: The GH/IGF-1 axis 
in ageing and longevity, Nat Rev Endocrinol 9:366–376, 2013.
 70.  Karvonen MJ, Kentala E, Mustala O: The effects of training on heart 
rate; a longitudinal study, Ann Med Exp Biol Fenn 35:307–315, 1957.
 71.  Kavanagh T : Exercise training in patients after heart transplanta-
tion, Herz 16:243–250, 1991.
 72.  Kavanagh T , Shephard RH, Pandit V: Marathon running after 
myocardial infarction, JAMA 229(12):1602–1605, 1974.
 73.  Kavanagh T , Yacoub MH, Mertens DJ, et al.: Cardiorespiratory 
responses to exercise training after orthotopic cardiac transplan-
tation, Circulation 77:162–171, 1988.
 74.  Kavanaugh T , Yacoub MH, Campbell R, et al.: Marathon run -
ning after cardiac transplantation: a case history, J Cardiac Rehab 
6:16–20, 1986.
 75.  King M , Bittner V, Josephson R, et al.: Medical director respon -
sibilities for outpatient cardiac rehabilitation/secondary pre -
vention programs: 2012 update: a statement for health care 
professionals from the American Association for Cardiovascular 
and Pulmonary Rehabilitation and the American Heart Associa-
tion, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 32:410–419, 2012.
 76.  King Jr  J T, Justice A C, Aron D C: Management of incidental 
pituitary microadenomas: a cost-effectiveness analysis, J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 82:3625–3632, 1997.
 77.  Kirkham H S, Clark B L, Paynter J , et  al.: The effect of a col -
laborative pharmacist-hospital care transition program on 
the likelihood of 30-day readmission, Am J Health Syst Pharm  
71:739–745, 2014.
 77a.  Klok FA, Kruip MJHA, van der Meer NJM, et al.: Confirmation 
of the high cumulative incidence of thrombotic complications in 

--- PAGE 626 ---
534.e3
References
critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19: an updated analysis, 
Thromb Res 191:148–150, 2020.
 78.  Kortebein P : Rehabilitation for hospital-associated decondition-
ing, Am J Phys Med Rehabil 88:66–77, 2009.
 79.  Kovesdy C P, Kopple J D, Kalantar-Zadeh K : Management of 
protein-energy wasting in non-dialysis-dependent chronic kid -
ney disease: reconciling low protein intake with nutritional ther-
apy, Am J Clin Nutr 97:1163–1177, 2013.
 80.  Kraal J J, Peek N, Van den Akker-Van Marle ME, et al.: Effects of 
home-based training with telemonitoring guidance in low to moder-
ate risk patients entering cardiac rehabilitation: short-term results of 
the FIT@Home study, Eur J Prev Cardiol 21(Suppl 2):26–31, 2014.
 81.  Kress J P, Gehlbach B, Lacy M, et al.: The long-term psychologi-
cal effects of daily sedative interruption on critically ill patients, 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 168:1457–1461, 2003.
 82.  Lai Y C, Potoka KC, Champion H C, et  al.: Pulmonary arterial 
hypertension: the clinical syndrome, Circ Res 115:115–130, 2014.
 83.  Lauer M , Froelicher E S, Williams M , et  al.: Exercise testing 
in asymptomatic adults: a statement for professionals from the 
American Heart Association Council on Clinical Cardiology, 
Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Preven-
tion, Circulation 112:771–776, 2005.
 84.  Lear S A: The delivery of cardiac rehabilitation using communi -
cations technologies: the virtual cardiac rehabilitation program, 
Can J Cardiol 34(10, Suppl 2):S278–S283, 2018.
 85.  Lee H , Chung H , Ko H , et  al.: Dedicated cardiac rehabilita -
tion wearable sensor and its clinical potential, PLoS One  
12(10):e0187108, 2017.
 86.  Leon A S, Certo C , Comoss P , et al.: Scientific evidence of the 
value of cardiac rehabilitation services with an emphasis on 
patients following myocardial infarction, J Cardiopulm Rehabil  
10:79–87, 1990.
 87.  Leon A S, Franklin B A, Costa F , et  al.: Cardiac rehabilitation 
and secondary prevention of coronary heart disease: an Ameri -
can Heart Association scientific statement from the Council 
on Clinical Cardiology (Subcommittee on Exercise, Cardiac 
Rehabilitation, and Prevention) and the Council on Nutrition, 
Physical Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physi -
cal Activity), in collaboration with the American Association 
of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, Circulation 
111:369–376, 2005.
 88.  Liou K , Ho S , Fildes J, Ooi S -Y: High intensity interval versus 
moderate intensity continuous training in patients with coronary 
artery disease: a meta-analysis of physiological and clinical param-
eters, Heart Lung Circ 25(2):166–174, 2016.
 89.  Long L , Mordi IR, Bridges C, et al.: Exercise-based cardiac reha-
bilitation for adults with heart failure, Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 1:Cd003331, 2019.
 90.  Lord R K, Mayhew CR, Korupolu R, et al.: ICU early physical 
rehabilitation programs: financial modeling of cost savings, Crit 
Care Med 41:717–724, 2013.
 91.  Maggio M , De Vita F, Lauretani F, et al.: IGF-1, the cross road 
of the nutritional, inflammatory and hormonal pathways to 
frailty, Nutrients 5:4184–4205, 2013.
 92.  Mak R H, Rotwein P: Myostatin and insulin-like growth factors 
in uremic sarcopenia: the yin and yang in muscle mass regula -
tion, Kidney Int 70:410–412, 2006.
 93.  Marzolini S : Integrating individuals with stroke into cardiac reha-
bilitation following traditional stroke rehabilitation: promoting 
a continuum of care, Can J Cardiol 34(10, Suppl 2):S240–S246, 
2018.
 94.  Marzolini S , Balitsky A, Jagroop D, et al.: Factors affecting atten-
dance at an adapted cardiac rehabilitation exercise program for 
individuals with mobility deficits poststroke, J Stroke Cerebrovasc 
Dis 25(1):87–94, 2016.
 95.  Matthews C E, Chen K Y, Freedson PS, et al.: Amount of time 
spent in sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003-2004, 
Am J Epidemiol 167:875–881, 2008.
 96.  Medina Quero J, Fernandez Olmo MR, Pelaez Aguilera MD, et al.: 
Real-time monitoring in home-based cardiac rehabilitation using 
wrist-worn heart rate devices, Sensors (Basel) 17(12), 2017.
 97.  Mendez-T ellez PA, Nusr R , Feldman D , et  al.: Early physical 
rehabilitation in the ICU: a review for the neurohospitalist, Neu-
rohospitalist 2:96–105, 2012.
 98.  Mercadante S , Ferrantelli A , T ortorici C, et  al.: Incidence of 
chronic pain in patients with end-stage renal disease on dialysis, 
J Pain Symptom Manage 30:302–304, 2005.
 99.  Miller M R, Crapo R, Hankinson J, et al.: General considerations 
for lung function testing, Eur Respir J 26:153–161, 2005.
 100.  Miller MR, Hankinson J, Brusasco V, et al.: Standardisation of 
spirometry, Eur Respir J 26:319–338, 2005.
 101.  Moore G E, Parsons D B, Stray-Gundersen J , et  al.: Uremic 
myopathy limits aerobic capacity in hemodialysis patients, Am J 
Kidney Dis 22:277–287, 1993.
 102.  Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle PA, et al.: Coronary heart-disease 
and physical activity of work, Lancet 265:1053–1057, 1953.
 103.  Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle PA, et al.: Coronary heart-disease 
and physical activity of work, Lancet 265:1111–1120, 1953.
 104.  Naide M : Prolonged television viewing as cause of venous 
and arterial thrombosis in legs, J Am Med Assoc  165:681–682, 
1957.
 105.  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI): NHLBI 
fact book fiscal year 2012 , Bethesda, 2012, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.
 106.  National Kidney Foundation: K/DOQI clinical practice guide -
lines for chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and 
stratification, Am J Kidney Dis 39(Suppl 1):S1–S266, 2002.
 107.  Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, et al.: Improving long-term 
outcomes after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a 
stakeholders’ conference, Crit Care Med 40:502–509, 2012.
 108.  Ng S M, Khurana R M, Yeang HW, et al.: Is prolonged use of 
computer games a risk factor for deep venous thrombosis in chil-
dren? Case study, Clin Med 3:593–594, 2003.
 109.  Nici L, Donner C, Wouters E, et al.: American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society statement on pulmonary rehabili-
tation, Am J Respir Crit Care Med 173:1390–1413, 2006.
 110.  Nici L, Limberg T, Hilling L, et al.: Clinical competency guide -
lines for pulmonary rehabilitation professionals: American Asso-
ciation of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation Position 
Statement, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev 27:355–358, 2007.
 111.  Niven D J, Bastos J F, Stelfox H T: Critical care transition pro -
grams and the risk of readmission or death after discharge from 
an ICU: a systematic review and meta-analysis, Crit Care Med  
42:179–187, 2014.
 112.  O’Connor GT, Buring JE, Yusuf S, et al.: An overview of ran -
domized trials of rehabilitation with exercise after myocardial 
infarction, Circulation 80:234–244, 1989.
 113.  Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, U.S: Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services: Healthy People 2020: objective 
development and selection process. Available at: http://healthypeople.
gov/2020/about/objectiveDevelopment.aspx.
 114.  Oldridge NB, Guyatt GH, Fischer ME, et al.: Cardiac rehabili -
tation after myocardial infarction. Combined experience of ran-
domized clinical trials, JAMA 260:945–950, 1988.
 115.  Painter P, Marcus R: Physical function and gait speed in patients 
with chronic kidney disease, Nephrol Nurs J 40:529–538, 2013, 
quiz 539.
 116.  Parker AM, Sricharoenchai T, Needham DM: Early rehabilita -
tion in the intensive care unit: preventing impairment of physical 
and mental health, Curr Phys Med Rehabil Rep 1:307–314, 2013.
 117.  Parshall M B, Schwartzstein R M, Adams L , et  al.: An official 
American Thoracic Society statement: update on the mecha -
nisms, assessment, and management of dyspnea, Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 185:435–452, 2012.
 118.  Patel S B, Kress J P: Sedation and analgesia in the mechanically 
ventilated patient, Am J Respir Crit Care Med 185:486–497, 2012.

--- PAGE 627 ---
534.e4
  References
 119.  Pennell J P, Bourgoignie JJ: Water reabsorption by papillary col-
lecting ducts in the remnant kidney, Am J Physiol  242:F657–
F663, 1982.
 120.  Peno-Green L , Verrill D, Vitcenda M, et al.: Patient and pro -
gram outcome assessment in pulmonary rehabilitation: an 
AACVPR statement, J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev  29:402–410, 
2009.
 121.  Poliner L R, Dehmer GJ, Lewis SE, et al.: Left ventricular per -
formance in normal subjects: a comparison of the responses 
to exercise in the upright and supine positions, Circulation 
62(3):528–534, 1980.
 122.  Prevention Research Centers, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention: Chronic disease prevention and health promotion: 
at a glance . Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/
resources/publications/aag/chronic.htm.
 122a.  Prince D, Hsieh J : Early rehabilitation in the intensive care 
unit, Curr Phys Med Rehabil Rep 3:214–221, 2015.
 123.  Qaseem A , Wilt TJ, Weinberger SE, et al.: Diagnosis and man -
agement of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a 
clinical practice guideline update from the American College 
of Physicians, American College of Chest Physicians, American 
Thoracic Society, and European Respiratory Society, Ann Intern 
Med 155:179–191, 2011.
 124.  Quindry J C, Franklin B A, Chapman M , et  al.: Benefits and 
risks of high-intensity interval training in patients with coro -
nary artery disease, Am J Cardiol 123(8):1370–1377, 2019.
 125.  Ranaldi H , Deighan C , Taylor L: Exploring patient-reported 
outcomes of home-based cardiac rehabilitation in relation to 
Scottish, UK and European guidelines: an audit using qualita -
tive methods, BMJ Open 8(12):e024499, 2018.
 126.  Ribeiro P AB, Boidin M, Juneau M, et al.: High-intensity inter -
val training in patients with coronary heart disease: prescription 
models and perspectives, Ann Phys Rehabil Med  60(1):50–57, 
2017.
 126a.  Richardson S , Hirsch J S, Narasimhan M , et  al.: Presenting 
characteristics, comorbidities, and outcomes among 5700 
patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the New York City 
area, JAMA 323:2052–2059, 2020.
 127.  Rocco M V, Gassman JJ, Wang SR, et al.: Cross-sectional study 
of quality of life and symptoms in chronic renal disease patients: 
the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study, Am J Kidney 
Dis 29:888–896, 1997.
 128.  Rock L F: Sedation and its association with posttraumatic stress 
disorder after intensive care, Crit Care Nurse 34:30–37, 2014. 
quiz 39.
 129.  Rockwood K , Stadnyk K, MacKnight C, et al.: A brief clinical 
instrument to classify frailty in elderly people, Lancet 353:205–
206, 1999.
 130.  Rogers J G, Butler J, Lansman SL, et al.: Chronic mechanical cir-
culatory support for inotrope-dependent heart failure patients 
who are not transplant candidates: results of the INTREPID 
T rial, J Am Coll Cardiol 50:741–747, 2007.
 131.  Ruskin J , McHale PA, Harley A, et al.: Pressure-flow studies in 
man: effect of atrial systole on left ventricular function, J Clin 
Invest 49:472–478, 1970.
 132.  Ryerson C J, Cayou C, T opp F, et al.: Pulmonary rehabilitation 
improves long-term outcomes in interstitial lung disease: a pro-
spective cohort study, Respir Med 108:203–210, 2014.
 133.  Sager M A, Franke T, Inouye SK, et al.: Functional outcomes of 
acute medical illness and hospitalization in older persons, Arch 
Intern Med 156:645–652, 1996.
 134.  Sandesara P B, Dhindsa D, Khambhati J, et al.: Reconfiguring 
cardiac rehabilitation to achieve panvascular prevention: new 
care models for a new world, Can J Cardiol  34(10s2):S231–
S239, 2018.
 135.  Sarma S , Zaric GS, Campbell MK, et al.: The effect of physical 
activity on adult obesity: evidence from the Canadian NPHS 
panel, Econ Hum Biol 14:1–21, 2014.
 136.  Schrier RW, editor: Diseases of the kidney and urinary tract, Phila-
delphia, 2007, Williams & Wilkins.
 137.  Schrier R W, Wang W: Acute renal failure and sepsis, N Engl J 
Med 351:159–169, 2004.
 138.  Schweickert W D, Pohlman M C, Pohlman A S, et  al.: Early 
physical and occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, 
critically ill patients: a randomised controlled trial, Lancet 
373:1874–1882, 2009.
 139.  Scurria P L, Webster M G, Wolf T M: Needs assessment for a 
health-promotion program in a medical center, Psychol Rep  
74:666, 1994.
 140.  Segura-Orti E, Johansen KL: Exercise in end-stage renal disease, 
Semin Dial 23:422–430, 2010.
 141.  Skobel E , Knackstedt C , Martinez-Romero A , et  al.: Cleland. 
Internet-based training of coronary artery patients: the Heart 
Cycle T rial, Heart and Vessels 32(4):408–418, 2017.
 142.  Starling R C, Cody R J: Cardiac transplant hypertension, Am J 
Cardiol 65:106–111, 1990.
 143.  Stevens R D, Dowdy D W, Michaels R K, et  al.: Neuromuscu -
lar dysfunction acquired in critical illness: a systematic review, 
Intensive Care Med 33:1876–1891, 2007.
 144.  Swigris JJ, Brown KK, Make BJ, et al.: Pulmonary rehabilitation 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: a call for continued investiga -
tion, Respir Med 102:1675–1680, 2008.
 145.  Tayrose G , Newman D , Slover J , et  al.: Rapid mobilization 
decreases length-of-stay in joint replacement patients, Bull Hosp 
Jt Dis 71:222–226, 2013.
 146.  Thomas RJ, King M , Lui K : AACVPR/ACC/AHA 2007 per -
formance measures on cardiac rehabilitation for referral to and 
delivery of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention services 
endorsed by the American College of Chest Physicians, Ameri -
can College of Sports Medicine, American Physical Therapy 
Association, Canadian Association of Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
European Association for Cardiovascular Prevention and Reha -
bilitation, Inter-American Heart Foundation, National Asso -
ciation of Clinical Nurse Specialists, Preventive Cardiovascular 
Nurses Association, and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, J Am 
Coll Cardiol 50(14):1400–1433, 2007.
 147.  Thomas R J, King M , Lui K , et  al.: AACVPR/ACCF/AHA 
2010 update: performance measures on cardiac rehabilitation 
for referral to cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention 
services endorsed by the American College of Chest Physi -
cians, the American College of Sports Medicine, the Ameri -
can Physical Therapy Association, the Canadian Association 
of Cardiac Rehabilitation, the Clinical Exercise Physiology 
Association, the European Association for Cardiovascular 
Prevention and Rehabilitation, the Inter-American Heart 
Foundation, the National Association of Clinical Nurse Spe -
cialists, the Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, 
and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons, J Am Coll Cardiol  
56:1159–1167, 2010.
 148.  Thompson P D: The benefits and risks of exercise training in 
patients with chronic coronary artery disease, JAMA 259:1537–
1540, 1988.
 149.  Thompson CH, Kemp G J, Taylor DJ, et al.: Effect of chronic 
uraemia on skeletal muscle metabolism in man, Nephrol Dial 
Transplant 8:218–222, 1993.
 150.  Tzeng H M: Understanding the prevalence of inpatient falls 
associated with toileting in adult acute care settings, J Nurs Care 
Qual 25:22–30, 2010.
 151.  Ueno A, T omizawa Y: Cardiac rehabilitation and artificial heart 
devices, J Artif Organs 12:90–97, 2009.
 152.  Van Camp S P, Peterson R A: Cardiovascular complications of 
outpatient cardiac rehabilitation programs, JAMA 256(9):1160–
1163, 1986.
 153.  Vongvanich P, Paul-Labrador MJ, Merz CN: Safety of medically 
supervised exercise in a cardiac rehabilitation center, Am J Car-
diol 77(15):1383–1385, 1996.

--- PAGE 628 ---
534.e5
References
 154.  Waters E, de Silva-Sanigorski A , Hall B J, et  al.: Interventions 
for preventing obesity in children, Cochrane Database Syst Rev  
12:CD001871, 2011.
 155.  Wenger N, Gilbert C , Skoropa M : Cardiac conditioning after 
myocardial infarction. An early intervention program, J Cardiac 
Rehabil 2:17–22, 1971.
 156.  Wewege MA, Ahn D, Yu J, et al.: High-intensity interval train -
ing for patients with cardiovascular disease-is it safe? A system -
atic review, J Am Heart Assoc 7(21):e009305, 2018.
 157.  Whitaker RC, Wright JA, Pepe MS, et al.: Predicting obesity in 
young adulthood from childhood and parental obesity, N Engl J 
Med 337:869–873, 1997.
 158.  Williams MA, Fleg JL, Ades PA, et al.: Secondary prevention of 
coronary heart disease in the elderly (with emphasis on patients 
> or = 75 years of age): an American Heart Association scientific 
statement from the Council on Clinical Cardiology Subcommit-
tee on Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and Prevention, Circula-
tion 105:1735–1743, 2002.
 159.  Wu Y, He Q, Yin X, et al.: Effect of individualized exercise dur -
ing maintenance haemodialysis on exercise capacity and health-
related quality of life in patients with uraemia, J Int Med Res  
42:718–727, 2014.

--- PAGE 629 ---
535
28
Chronic Medical Conditions: 
Pulmonary Disease, Organ 
Transplantation, and 
Diabetes
JONATHAN H. WHITESON, JEFFREY M. COHEN, AND 
SOFIYA PRILIK
Approximately 50% of the US adult population is living with one 
chronic health condition and 25% are living with two. Although 
just over 12% of the total adult population live in the community 
with a disability, the rate of disability significantly increases with age, 
rising to 35% of people older than the age of 65. As the American 
and global population ages, there is an increasing number of people 
living with chronic medical conditions and disability, often with 
multiple comorbidities. The physiatrist and rehabilitation medicine 
team are playing an ever-increasing role in the continuum of care in 
our evolving healthcare system in the management of such patients. 
Individuals with chronic pulmonary, cardiovascular, renal, and 
hepatic diseases; with diabetes mellitus (DM) and associated com-
plications; and undergoing solid organ transplantation will require 
rehabilitative services and the expertise of a physiatrist. It is essential 
that the rehabilitation medicine specialist be knowledgeable in the 
management of such conditions and potential complications.
Pulmonary Rehabilitation
Definition
Pulmonary rehabilitation (PR) is defined as an evidence-based, 
multidisciplinary, comprehensive intervention that can be inte -
grated into the management of individuals with chronic lung dis-
ease across the continuum of care.125
PR is a multifaceted program, which involves optimization of 
medical management, physical conditioning, education, nutri -
tional counseling, coping skills, and psychosocial support with the 
goal of reducing symptoms, increasing strength exercise tolerance, 
improving functional status, psychological well-being, and quality 
of life (QOL), and reducing healthcare resource use.168 
Classification of Pulmonary Disease
Pulmonary disease can be classified into four major categories, 
which include obstructive lung disease, restrictive lung disease, 
pulmonary vasculature disease, and hypoventilation syndromes. 
Obstructive lung diseases, the most common diagnostic pre -
sentation for PR, are characterized by expiratory airflow limita -
tion on pulmonary function testing (PFT) and include chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)—chronic bronchitis and 
emphysema, bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, and asthma. Expira -
tory airflow limitation results from a decrease of the diameter of 
the bronchial lumen due to mucus blockage, inflammation and 
edema of the bronchial walls, or dynamic expiratory collapse due 
to loss of supportive structure. Restrictive lung diseases, character-
ized by a reduction in all lung volumes on PFT , are classified as 
intrinsic with lung parenchymal involvement as in interstitial lung 
diseases, or extrinsic to the lung as in obesity and neuromuscular 
disorders. These conditions cause a physical reduction in lung size/
volume or increased lung stiffness, resulting in a decreased volume 
of inspired air. Disorders of the pulmonary vasculature include 
pulmonary embolism (PE), pulmonary hypertension (PH), and 
pulmonary venoocclusive disease. Hypoventilation syndromes 
include obstructive sleep apnea and obesity hypoventilation syn -
drome. Many respiratory diseases fit into one of these categories, 
but individuals may present with a combination or mixed pattern 
of disease. The most common reason for referral to PR is COPD.
Distinguishing Chronic Bronchitis and 
Emphysema
Chronic bronchitis is a “clinical” diagnosis based on the volume of 
daily mucus production over months and years cleared by cough 
and typified by acute exacerbations, often infective, and relatively 
quiescent remissions. Excess mucus, resulting from an increased 
number and size of mucus secreting goblet cells stimulated by 
elements in tobacco smoke and infection, blocks airways causing 
obstruction. Mucus plugging leads to ventilation/perfusion mis -
matching and can progress to significant hypoxemia, marked hyper-
capnia, PH, and right heart failure (HF) —cor-pulmonale—the 
classic blue bloater—dyspneic, cyanotic, and volume overloaded.

--- PAGE 630 ---
536
SECTION 3  Common Clinical Problems
Emphysema is a “pathologic” diagnosis based on evidence of 
airway destruction distal to the terminal bronchiole on high-
resolution lung computed tomography (CT) scan or lung biopsy 
(currently rarely done). Elements in tobacco smoke activate pro -
teases that cause destruction of elastins and supportive tissues 
in the lung interstitium, leaving bronchial walls unsupported 
and prone to expiratory collapse causing obstruction. There is 
no ventilation/perfusion mismatching due to equal destruction 
of respiratory epithelium and vasculature resulting in significant 
hypoxemia, mild hypercapnia, air trapping—the classic pink 
puffer—dyspneic, noncyanotic, barrel chested.  
Epidemiology of Lung Disease
COPD, the most common form of lung disease and the third 
leading cause of chronic morbidity and mortality in the United 
States and worldwide, is primarily attributable to smoking.40,101
Approximately 25% of adults with COPD have never smoked, 
and workplace exposures likely contribute to much of their 
disease.174
Worldwide, other significant contributors include fossil-fuel 
burning furnaces (for home heating and cooking) and environ -
mental pollution or smog. Encouragingly, current smoking in 
the United States has declined from 20.9% in 2005 to 14.0% 
in 2017 according to the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC). However, each day in the United States, 
approximately 2000 youth younger than 18 years of age smoke 
their first cigarette and more than 300 youth younger than 18 
years of age become daily cigarette smokers. Cigarette smoking 
accounts for more than 480,000 deaths every year, or approxi -
mately one in five deaths. Approximately 80% of COPD deaths 
are caused by smoking. According to the CDC, in 2017 there 
were 16 million Americans currently diagnosed with COPD 
but an estimated 12 million more living with undiagnosed 
COPD.36,40 COPD facts and statistics are shown in Box 
28.1.6,166
Restrictive pulmonary disease is most commonly caused by:
	 •	 	interstitial	 lung	 diseases—conditions	 that	 cause	 pulmonary	
fibrosis (autoimmune related—scleroderma, rheumatoid 
arthritis; inorganic dust exposure—asbestosis, silicosis; idio -
pathic—idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoid)
	 •	 	neuromuscular	 disorders	 (e.g.,	 amyotrophic	 lateral	 sclerosis,	
spinal cord injury [SCI], muscular dystrophy)
	 •	 	lung/thoracic	 volume	 reduction	 (e.g.,	 pleural	 disorders—
mesothelioma and effusion; lung resection; and abnormalities 
of the thoracic spine—scoliosis/kyphosis, or chest wall—pec -
tus excavatum).
In SCI, lesions above C3 paralyze the diaphragm (C3–5) as 
well as the intercostal muscles of respiration and patients will 
require mechanical ventilation. Injury below C5 leaves the dia -
phragm intact, and respiratory impairment depends on the level 
of injury and extent of intercostal weakness. Below T6, no sig -
nificant inspiratory muscle impairment is expected because exter-
nal (and internal) intercostals are innervated by T1 to T6 roots. 
Expiration is typically gravity assisted, but forced expiration—as 
in coughing—requires a forced expiration against a closed glottis 
using the abdominal muscles. Lower thoracic lesions will impair 
abdominal muscle wall control and effective coughing; rectus 
abdominis and external/internal oblique are innervated by T5-L1 
roots. According to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical 
Center, as of 2018 there were an estimated 247,000 to 358,000 
people with SCI or spinal cord dysfunction in the United States. 
Of these patients, 59.7% were either incomplete (47.2%) or 
complete (11.5%) tetraplegia with significant involvement of the 
muscles of respiration. Duchenne muscular dystrophy is one of 
the more common neuromuscular diseases that cause restrictive 
pulmonary dysfunction, with an incidence of 1 per 3500 male 
infants in the United States.105
Acute PE ranks third among the most common types of car -
diovascular diseases, with an annual incidence estimated to be 60 
to 70 per 100,000. Untreated, the mortality rate is high (30%), 
dropping to 8% if appropriately treated. Risk factors include age, 
personal history of deep vein thrombosis (DVT)  or PE, active 
malignancy, disabling conditions such as heart or respiratory fail-
ure, coagulation disorders, hormone replacement therapy, and 
oral contraception.16
Primary, or idiopathic, PH has no clear etiology but is likely 
related to genetic susceptibility. Approximately half the cases of 
PH occur in association with other diseases such as connective tis-
sue disease, heart disease including congenital heart disease, coro-
nary artery disease, systemic hypertension, liver disease (cirrhosis), 
and lung diseases including blood clots to the lungs and emphy -
sema. The exact incidence of PH is not known, but approximately 
200,000 related hospitalizations occur annually in the United 
States. The incidence increases with age and is more common 
among women and non-Hispanic blacks. PH is associated with 
hypoxia and right HF . Appropriate oxygen supplementation in 
patients with COPD can prevent or reverse PH and is part of the 
management of cor pulmonale.134
Between 5% and 10% of the US adult population have diag -
nosed obstructive sleep apnea, 7% have breathing pauses during 
sleep that put them at risk for more severe sleep events, and 23% 
to 59% snore. Sleep-disordered breathing is more likely to be 
reported by men than women. However, more than 80% with 
signs and symptoms of moderate to severe sleep-disordered breath-
ing remain undiagnosed. Sleep-disordered breathing is associated 
with increased risk for coronary artery disease, HF , and stroke.161 
Symptoms of Pulmonary Disease
Typical presenting symptoms of pulmonary disease include a history 
of worsening shortness of breath on progressively less intense exertion, 
cough with or without sputum, progressive weakness, and fatigue. 
Functional decline is evidenced by limitations with activities of daily 
living (ADLs), balance disorder and falls, progressive difficulty with 
	 •	 	The	majority	of	patients	with	COPD	have	asthma.
	 •	 	Asthma	is	the	most	common	childhood	chronic	disease.
	 •	 	Causes	of	COPD	are	asthma,	chronic	bronchitis,	and	emphysema,	singly	
or	in	combination.
	 •	 	Smoking	is	the	primary	risk	factor	for	COPD.	Approximately	80%	of	
COPD	deaths	are	caused	by	smoking.
	 •	 	Alpha-1	antitrypsin	deficiency	is	underrecognized	by	physicians.
	 •	 	COPD	is	the	third	leading	cause	of	death	worldwide.
	 •	 	Annual	worldwide	adult	deaths	from	COPD	are	3.1	million.
	 •	 	In	2010,	>70,000	females	died	compared	with	>64,000	males.
	 •	 	In	2010,	the	cost	to	the	nation	for	COPD	was	projected	to	be	
approximately	$49.9	billion,	including	$29.5	billion	in	direct	healthcare	
expenditures,	$8.0	billion	in	indirect	morbidity	costs,	and	$12.4	billion	in	
indirect	mortality	costs.
 • BOX 28.1      Facts Regarding Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD)